Joe Rogan podcast, check it out! The Joe Rogan Experience. Train by day, Joe Rogan podcast by night, all day! Hello, Mark. Hello. Good to see you. Thanks for having me back. My pleasure. Good to see you. Well, the world's still functional. It's amazing. Yeah, amazing. We wanted to talk, you wanted to talk about the post-election sort of a wrap-up. Yeah. Sort of where we're standing. Are you happy? I'm happy. It was a weird one. Mourning in America. That was one of the first times ever I felt hopeful after an election. Like you should have seen the green room at the comedy club. Everybody was like, yes. Yes. Whoo. So my theory is the timeline, like in a science fiction movie, the timeline has split twice in the last like nine months. What was the first split? That was when Trump got shot. Oh. Yeah. And there was that moment where the world was going to head in two totally different directions. Right. If he got hit. Yeah. It was the most conspicuous display of physical bravery I've ever seen. Right. Afterwards. In that moment. Exactly. Yeah. And it could have gone, you know, horrifically badly for the entire world after that. So that was timeline split number one. So that other timeline is out there somewhere. Yeah. And I don't want to visit it. Boy, imagine being stuck there. What kind of horrible karma. No. I mean, that's a totalitarian dystopian nightmare. That's the bad place. Yeah. And then timeline split again on election day. I know you fancy a good conspiracy theory. Yes. But that gentleman being able to pull off what he did and, you know, the way it happened, the way it all went down is it's a Lee Harvey Oswald 2.0. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Clearly. Yeah. The shooter. Yeah. That we still don't know anything. There's no call for disclosure. Yeah. There's no call for a press conference. There's no toxicology report. The toxicology report had to have been done. Yeah. Wouldn't you want to know, like, what kind of stuff this kid is on that made him want to do that or if anything? Yeah. So my theory is it's almost as if the people want us to think it's a conspiracy. Like, it's almost like the whole thing is almost orchestrated. Like, it's just, it's so strange. You know, this is like the rapid cremation. Like, the whole thing was just completely bizarre. And then you're exactly right. Like, no hearings, no nothing. Now, having said that, I expect that this will change. Right. So, you know. Do you think they're going to do a dive into what happened? I mean, I would. I don't know if they will, but, you know, I certainly would if I was in a position to do that. I wonder what they can actually find. I mean, I don't know if they wanted it to be a conspiracy that people talked about or if that's simply the best way to pull it off. Yeah. Or it's just, yeah. Or it's just, you know, as we saw, I think, in the hearing afterwards, maybe just a systemic collapse of confidence. There's also a confidence in the fact that the news timeline today is so rapid. When things are relevant and people are paying attention to them, you have a couple of days. Yeah. Even with an assassination attempt on a former president. Yeah. Where people were murdered. Yeah. And there's, it's in and out. Yeah, that's right. I think it's exactly, I think the news cycle now is like a two to three day social media firestorm. And we just cycle from one to the next. Yeah. And we have the memory of Goldfish and, right, you know, things that would have been error defining just come and go with astonishing speed and shock. By the way, I should say, I don't think there was, I doubt there was a conspiracy. I don't think anything's possible. I think it's just, we have a confidence collapse. And I think we saw that on display when the director at the time, you know, testified. Well, there's all the elements that it could have been a conspiracy. It could have, but this is kind of the thing, which is just like, it also could have been systemic confidence collapse. And then it's like, okay, would it be better off for the institute, you know, if it looks like a conspiracy, right? Yeah. Like, you know, which world, okay, two timelines. Which world would you rather live in? The one with the conspiracies or the one with just like incompetence everywhere? Well, I think you have both simultaneously. I don't think it's binary. Right. I think there's incompetence everywhere and conspiracies are legitimate. They're real. Yeah. And that one seems like conspiracy. The fact that his house was professionally scrubbed, there's no social media record of this kid online. There's no nothing. He's the only kid of his generation who's that fired up about politics to have no online footprint. Like, it just doesn't make any sense. And he's a registered Republican. Like, the whole thing is like, so weird. And he was like a bad shooter and then he became a great shooter. Well, he definitely trained. Yeah, right. Like, you could train someone to become a good shooter. This is all you have to do. Don't move and do that. Right. Get all your mechanics in place. Right. Understand technique and positioning, breathing. It's not like the most complicated thing from a prone position. Right. But the fact that he chose to use iron sights I thought was weird too. Yeah. There's a lot of weirdness to it. Yeah. You know, from 140 yards with a scope, that is an easy shot. Yeah. Well, then he could just like wander up. That's the different timeline. The different timeline is he has a scope and that's it. Okay. All right. Right. That would have. And Trump's dead. Yep. And then, boy. Yep. Boy, do we live in a crazy world then. Yeah. Completely bizarre. I mean, what does the streets look like right now? Yeah. What kind of like protests and riots and- 
You think January 6th was not if they had killed Trump that would be January 6th on steroids everywhere Yeah, that's right. And we would we would experience it. I mean, you know, I don't know when I was a kid my High school high school history teacher got us a bootleg copy of this. There's a printer film You know, it's like what a gangster high school. He was actually pretty focused on that He's really loved the Kennedy assassination So we spent a lot of time on that and you know You know, you kind of watch it frame by frame and you can kind of see what's happening with this lots of questions But like when things like that happen, you know today it's gonna be in high-definition 4k ultra. It's rounds on forever Yeah, right playing out in real time forever. And so like I yeah, I very much don't want to live in the world Where those things happen? Well, we are very fortunate. I mean, I like I said after the election I was like wow voting works Voting works that's nice like they don't have the system completely rigged and then but they kind of Tried to rig it at least with the media the where the real rigging in the 2020 elections me you didn't cast all your conspiracies upon it was in terms of like mail-in ballots and all this jazz but the real rigging was the collusion between Social media companies and the government to suppress information that would have altered the effect of the election. That's legitimate. Oh, yeah for sure Yeah, that was like direct interference and it was in aided and abetted by a lot of former, you know intelligence officials Yeah, and by the current administration, you know tons of pressure on censorship coming from this, you know The current administration and all their kind of arms of the censorship apparatus You have your hands in the tech community of your fingers and all that jazz like what was the general attitude? About all that stuff when it was revealed. How did how did people you know, how did your peers respond to that? I think anybody in social media the internet companies knew it. So it was pretty widely understood I mean look there's nothing that happened at Twitter in the Twitter files It wasn't happening all the all the other companies, right? So it's a it's a consistent pattern if you got the YouTube files They would look exactly the same and of course, we should get the YouTube file Sure, right and now we probably probably will now with you know, this new administration is probably gonna carve all this stuff open But yeah, no, look it was a pattern and then look, you know The companies bear a lot of responsibility and the people in the companies, you know made a lot of I think bad judgment calls But the government like the Biden White House was directly exerting censorship pressure on American companies to censor American citizens Which I think by the way is just flatly illegal like I think it's actually subject to criminal charges Like I think there are people with criminal liability who were involved in this so there was that there were also members of Congress doing the same thing which is also illegal and Then there was a lot of funding of outside third-party groups that were that were bringing a lot of pressure down on censorship Yeah, and just an example that is there's a unit at Stanford, you know right next door, you know to us that you know It was the internet censorship unit that was funded by the US government And exerted tremendous pressure on the companies to censor and it was it was very effective at doing so Does it smell like sulfur when you walk those halls? It is very dark and grim This whole thing is very bad. And so Oh, yeah Stanford Stanford by the way Another unit like that at Harvard, you know a bunch of universities got pulled into this a lot of NGOs and nonprofits got pulled into this and so the Twitter file showed us kind of the basic roadmap and then there's this thing called the weaponization committee that Congressman Jordan is running that has also revealed a lot of this But I I would imagine the new Trump administration is going to come in and carve all that wide open and I know that there Are people in you know being appointed to senior positions who are very determined to do that This episode is brought to you by blinds.com You probably think custom window coverings are just to keep the neighbors from staring in right? But here's the thing They also make your place look badass and can help you save on utility bills with blinds.com It's easy to get top quality window treatments and service and it's a hundred percent online No hidden fees. No weird markups like you'd get in a showroom and their Black Friday deals are already live So there's no need to wait for some pushy salesperson to give you an insane quote with blinds.com You can do a free virtual consultation with one of their award-winning designers when you have the time They'll send you samples quick and easy and free Then you can either go full DIY or let blinds.com handle everything from measuring to Installation these guys have covered over 25 million windows all backed with 100% Satisfaction guarantee you can't lose so head to blinds.com Now and grab those Black Friday deals all month long use the code Rogan for $50 off when you spend $500 or more limited time offer rules and restrictions apply see blinds.com for details One of the things that I found really kind of shocking was when they revealed how much money the Democrats had spent on the election And how much money was spent on activist groups, right? It's like more than a hundred million dollars, right? Yeah, there's just there's extensive government funding of politically oriented NGOs. Yeah
Yeah. NGO is one of those great terms, like non-governmental organization, all right, like what the hell is that? Right. What is that? Tell me. I don't know. Well, it's sort of a charity. Sort of. Sort of. But most of the time, it's a political entity. It's an entity with a political agenda. But then it's funded by the government in a very large percentage of cases, including the NGOs and the censorship complex, like the government grants, National Science Foundation grants, like direct State Department grants, right, direct money. And then, okay, now you've got an NGO funded by the government. Well, that's not an NGO. That's a geo. Right. Right. And then you've got a conspiracy, like with censorship, then you have a conspiracy because you've got government officials using government money to fund what look like private organizations that aren't. And then what happens is the government outsources to these NGOs the things that it's not legally allowed to do. Like what? Like censorship. Oh, okay. Like violation of First Amendment rights. Right. So what they always say is the First Amendment only applies to the government. The First Amendment says the government cannot censor American citizens. And so what they do is if you want to censor American citizens in the government, if you're smart, you don't do that. What you do is you fund an outside organization and then you have them do it. Boy. Right. And that's what's been happening. Right. And that's like hiring a hitman. Like it's not okay to murder someone, but you can hire someone to murder someone and then you're clean. Yeah. And if you want to solve a murder, it's not enough to find out who the hitman was. You have to find out who paid the hitman. Right. Of course. You want to work your way up the chain. You want to get your hands into the White House. The best defense the companies have is that a lot of this happened under coercion. Right. Because when the government puts pressure on you, like it might be a phone call. It might be a letter. It might be the threat of an investigation. It might be a subpoena. It could take many forms. But when the government does that, it carries, you know, that's a very powerful message. Right. It's like a message from a mob boss. Right. Right. It's like, don't you want to do me a favor? Right. It's like, you know, yes, Mr. Gambino, I do. Right. Like I like my corner store. I'd like it to not catch on fire tonight. Yeah. There's this overwhelming hammer blow of pressure that comes in. And by the way, even when the government doesn't talk to you directly, if they're funding the organization that is talking to you, then it's very clear what's happening. And so you come under incredible pressure. And so the whole kind of chain, this whole chain of governments, activists, universities and companies was corrupted. And then on top of that, people in the companies in a lot of cases made a lot of decisions that I think they're probably increasingly starting to regret. What was confusing to me was that the government spent so much money on these activist groups during the election. And I didn't understand what purpose that would serve. What function would it serve to spend all this money on these activist groups that already support you, supposedly? Are you bribing them to support you? Are you paying them to go on talk shows and consistently repeat the government's message, the current administration's message? What would be the function of that? So I think in some cases it's just pay to play, right? So for example, we know that Kamala's campaign paid certain on her personalities, you know, and then there were, you know, it's your point. People are very supportive of Kamala, who then gave her, you know, interviews that went really well. And so I think in some cases you just have straight pay to play. That's just how that system works. It's just expected. And then I think you have other organizations like these NGOs and others, activist groups where they're actually, you know, they actually do field activities, right? And so there's, you know, maybe there's a get out the vote component or there's, you know, social media influence downstream component or some other, you know, kind of field activity that's happening in support of the election. I just didn't think that they paid, like when it's still unclear whether or not celebrities got paid to endorse her, right? Have you... They've mixed it up because there's, like Oprah said, Oprah says her production company was paid to put on the production, but she was not paid for the interview. Yeah, whatever. But it was, you know, two, whatever, two million dollars. Two and a half million dollars. It was initially listed as one and it turned out it was 2.5. Right. Like if I have a production company and my production company gets paid $2.5 million to endorse Trump, and then I go, I didn't get any of that money. People are like, shut the fuck up because it's your company, what are you talking about? And also, how much does it cost to do an event? How does it cost $2.5 million to put on an event? Like are you feeding people gold sandwiches? Like what are you doing? Like how is that possible? Yeah, exactly. So, yeah. And then you can see the fact that it's deliberately obfuscated, of course, is a clue. I just thought the really bizarre one was the allegations, and I'd say unsubstantiated allegations. It's been alleged that Beyonce got $10 million and Lizzo got $3 million, Eminem got $1.8 million. Like, really? Yeah. I think if you just like published all these numbers, these celebrities would all get so mad at each other. Oh, sure they are. Then you would learn everything. Eminem got short. He got short. Right, right, right. Lizzo's furious right now, right? Yeah. Lizzo's probably listening to this right now being like, what? Well, I wonder if Lizzo's like, I didn't get shit. I would say it, but why haven't they said it? Like Beyonce has been mum about the whole thing. I think I would probably say, like, I didn't get any money to do that.
Was a weird one too because a lot of people thought Beyonce was gonna do a concert, right? And she just went out there and talked and everybody's like what the fuck because they all came to see a free Beyonce concert Yes, and then she just said I want to support Kamala Harris and everybody's like good good Now if you like it, then you should have put a ring on it Come on we love your songs. Yes. That's what we're here for. Yes. I just didn't think that it was even possible that a I Didn't think a candidate would ever pay for an endorsement. Yeah, I mean the fact that it was even alleged. Yeah. Yeah Well, you know and then there's of course there's there's the even stinkier version arguably Which is all that all the social media influencer campaigns now, there's you know, tremendous amount of payola that's for sure right because I know people personally who are approached multiple times and Offered a substantial amount of money to post things in support of Harris Yeah, and like I'm pro-capitalism and I'm happy for them if they get paid but like maybe we should know Yeah, that seems like something you should absolutely have to disclose It should be like like say if I was gonna do an ad for you know Whatever a certain coffee company Black Rifle coffee and I did it on my Instagram. I'd have to say ad I have to say this is an ad. It's a paid ad. Yeah, and that's part of the thing. Yeah, you know Yeah, unless it's your company. Yep. Like you're supposed to say they're paying me to do this. Yeah. Yeah Well, you know look the good news with these is we learn each cycle We learn a lot about how politics works. We learn about a lot about how fake it is We learn a lot about the things we put up with for a very long time I mean everybody's always like freaked out by like whatever the new guy does but like this real scandal in most cases I think it's just the way the system already works. It's a sneaky system Yeah, well another fascinating aspect of the system that we learned out this time around is the Uncontrolled aspect of it like what Trump called earned media, right was much more powerful than anything else The uncontrolled version of it like one of the things that unfortunately for them Mass media or corporate media has done is they've diminished their credibility so much so much So that like Joy Reid was on TV today talking about saying that Trump was gonna shoot protesters and just wild unsubstantiated crazy shit and The more they do stuff like that the more that they say things like that the more it diminishes their impact and the more it Drives people to independent media sources. Yeah, I'm sure you've seen the ratings collapse that they've been you know They're down to like they're down to like MSNBC's down to like 50,000 people in the 18 to 20 18 to 49 demo That is so wild which is tiny. It's so crazy. It's really tiny So I think that's happening the Gallup organization has done polls on trust in institutions including, you know Media for the last 60 years. It's been a steady slide down and in the last, you know, four years. It's fallen off a cliff I think it's real. Oh, there's another study that came out. The kids are not watching a lot less TV Kids are just giving up on TV Yeah, they're just you know, they're on YouTube and tick-tock and Instagram and other things and so like I I think it's tipping a question I've been asking myself is when when will the actual, you know that famously 1960 was the first television election, right? You know sort of legend has it because the one where the televised debate really mattered and if you saw the televised debate you saw Confident Kennedy and nervous Nixon and if you heard right you experience something different and handsomeness and handsomeness effect and vitality Yeah health. Yeah, right and all these things sort of positive positive spirit positive energy I'm actually not this this might be of have been the first internet election or maybe we actually haven't had it yet Like I feel like we're really close to the first internet election, but maybe it's not all the way there. This is it I think this there's an argument that this is it right and that you know, all the you know All the stuff especially in the last six months all the podcasts obvious in your show played a big role but like I think there's a real if you're gonna run in 28 like I think there's like a fully internet native way to run these campaigns that might literally involve like zero television advertising and maybe you don't even need to raise that money and maybe you to Your point if you have the right message, maybe you just go straight direct. Yeah, I might be a completely different way to do this I think that's the only way now and I think if you do pay people It's not gonna have the same impact, you know I think these call her daddy shows and all these different shows that she went on I mean, I'm sure they had an impact but I think that in the future I'm sure they're scrambling to try to create their own version of this show This is one thing that keeps coming up like we need our own Joe Rogan, right, but they had me Number one they had you number one. They had you They had you in the drove you away is that number one number but they also have you know, ABC NBC CBS CNN, right? But that doesn't work anymore. I know that's like, you know, like you're using smoke signals and everybody else has a cell phone Yeah, it doesn't work. Yeah, that's right. That's right. It's just it's it's a bizarre time It's really interesting though. Like as you said like we're in a great timeline and I think It's a fascinating timeline too because there's so much uncertainty and there's so much right we are at the verge of a
AI, you know, open AI, you know, Altman has said now that he thinks 2025 will be the year that AI becomes sentient, whatever that means, you know, artificial general intelligence will be will emerge. And who knows how that affects I've said publicly, and I'm kind of half joking that we need AI government. Yep. You know, it sounds crazy to say, but instead of having this like alpha chimpanzee that runs the tribe of humans, how about we have some like really logical fact based, you know, program that, you know, makes it like really reasonable and equitable in a way that we can all agree to, right? Let's govern things in that manner, right? So you can actually simulate this today, because you can go on these systems, shed GPT, or a lot of these others. And you can you can ask, you know, how should we handle issue x? How should this be? Yeah, we've done that, right? How should the Department of Energy do whatever nuclear policy or whatever. And what I find when I do that, as I discovered two things, number one, of course, these things are these things have the same problem, social media said, which is they're tremendously politically biased, and right, that's on purpose, and they need to fix that. And that's going to be a big topic in the next several years. But the other thing you learn is, if you can get through the political basically bias and censorship, if you can actually get to a discussion of the actual issue, it's you get very sophisticated answers. Yes, right. Very logical, very straightforward. And it will explain every aspect of the issue to you. And it'll take you through all the pros and cons. Yeah. And you know, I mean, it might be the way to go, which is so horrifying for people to think because everyone's worried about the terminators taking over the world. And like, if that's the first step, as we let them govern us, well, look, there's nothing stopping a politician from using this. There's nothing stopping a policymaker from using you know, as a tool, right? You start out at least you start out using it as a tool. There's nothing to prevent you like, for example, I think military commanders in the field are going to have basically AI battlefield assistance that are going to advise them on strategy tactics, yes, and how to win conflicts, and then it'll start to work its way up. And then they'll be doing you know, war planning. And then if you're a general, if you're, you know, a sergeant or a colonel or a general, it's going to just mean you perform better. Yeah. And so maybe there's like, you know, the sort of man-machine kind of symbiotic relationship. You could imagine that happening more in the policy process and in the political process. And there's also AI controlled jets, which are far superior. They did, Mike Baker was telling us about that. They did these simulated dogfights and the AI controlled jets won 100% of the time. Yeah. Over humans. Yeah. And there's a bunch of reasons for that. And part of it is just simply the speed of and so forth. But another big thing is if you don't have a human in the plane, you don't have the, they say the spam in the can, you don't have the, you know, you don't have the human body. Yeah. In the plane. You don't have to keep a human being alive, which means you can be a lot faster and you can move a lot more quickly. G-forces. Much higher G-forces. Yeah. And then there's no option for someone to go crazy. Yeah. That's also right. Yes, exactly. There's no human element, you know, which is a real element. Yeah. No, look, I think we're going to, it's going to be common to have like Mach 5 drone, you know, jet drones within, within a few years. And, you know, there'll be a fraction of the size of the current, you know, manned planes, which means you can have like a lot more of them. And so you kind of want to imagine, you know, a thousand of these things like coming over the horizon right at you. And it really changes. It's actually, I think it'd be very interesting. It really changes the fundamental equation of war in the following sense. Fundamentally in the past, the people who won wars are the people who had the most men and the most material. Right. Right. And you had the most soldiers and you needed the most equipment. And in this drone world that we're talking about, it's going to be the people with the most money and the best technology. Yeah. Right. And so, for example, small states, you know, small advanced states like Singapore will be able to punch way above their weight and then kind of large sort of economically or technologically backward states that normally would have won will now lose. And so it's going to, it's going to be a recalibration. And then it has the, the good news is you're not putting soldiers at risk, right? So you'll have a lot less, a lot less death. The bad news arguably is it'll be easier to get into conflicts because you're not putting soldiers at risk. So there's going to have to be a recalibration of like when you actually like lean into an attack. I'm sure you're aware of all this UAP disclosure jazz that you see on television. The more I look into it, the more I think at least a percentage of it, a healthy percentage of it is bullshit. And there's probably some government projects where they've developed some very sophisticated propulsion systems that they've applied to drones and that that's what these people are seeing. And this is one of the reasons why they continually have sightings over secured military spaces, like out in the Eastern seaboard, like there's areas over Virginia where they continually see them in San Diego, they see them off the coast of San Diego, where there's a place where you would test stuff like that. Yeah. Well, so of course, we know that that was the case for a very long time for sure from the 50s through the 80s, because the development of stealth was highly classified. And the SR-71 was brand new at one point. And so you had these like, you know, alien, you know. Do you pay attention to any of that stuff at all? Of course. Of course. A hundred percent. Yeah. And then, and then, and then by the way, we're not the only ones. And so I, you know, my speculation would be that some of the military based stuff is, you know, the Chinese doing something similar. And, you know, we got a glimpse into that with.
the balloon. Well, that one was goofy, though. They got shut down, but still, the fact that the Chinese are flying surveillance balloons over American territory, and they were able to slip through our early warning systems and just loiter above military bases, and take lots of imagery, and do whatever scans they do. Yeah. And literally, nothing was happening, and we didn't even know they were there most of the time. And so, I would just say, that's like a tip of the ... It feels like a tip of the iceberg kind of thing, where if they were doing that, there were probably other things going on. Well, I've read that someone had commented that similar things had happened during the Trump administration, but they didn't tell Trump, because they didn't want him to shoot them down. Interesting. For the record, I'm pro-shooting them down. Yeah. I think you should probably shoot them down. They're taking pictures and shit. They're nuts. There's not even people up there. Fucking shoot them down. Yeah. Yeah. What's the problem? Yes. Exactly. Yeah. Do you think there are any of those that are not of this world? I don't think there's any way to know from the outside. Have you ever pondered it, late at night, sitting on your porch, staring up at the sky? Of course. Racist. Number one, is there or not? And then, if it is, did it recently get here, or have they been here for a long time? Did they arrive 5,000 years ago? Tucker thinks they're demons and angels. I mean, demons and angels. Are demons and angels real? It's like, literally, probably not, but certainly, they're metaphorically real. And are there kind of shades of gray between literal and metaphorical? Well, the actions are certainly demonic and angelic. Right? Yeah, of course. Human beings, things that happen in the world are uplifting or horrific. Yeah. Evil people doing evil things are possessed. I mean, they're possessed by something. Right. Right. Like, something is going on. Right. And, like, you know, what's the dividing line between, you know, an actual supernatural force and some sort of psychological, sociological thing that's so overwhelming that it just takes control of people and drives them crazy? Like, you might as well call that a demon. Yeah. It's fascinating because, like, when you think of it from theological terms, like, when you think of it from a religious perspective, you know, people would apply, what would a demon do? What would angels do? What is the will of God and what is, like, the evils of the worst aspects of humanity? You would, you know, you could apply them to so many things in the world, but we're very reluctant to say that something is demonic, like, even though it's clearly demonic, like, it's clearly inaction. Like, this is what a demon would do. A demon would possess people to gun down children, you know, and, you know, use drones to shoot down a wedding party. A demon would do that. Right. Exactly. So, a friend of mine is a religious scholar. He teaches at Catholic University and he's a religious history scholar, and he says that medieval people would have had a...medieval people were psychologically better prepared for the era ahead of us with AI and robots and drones everywhere than we are because medieval people took it for granted that they lived in a world with higher powers, higher spirits, angels, demons, all kinds of supernatural entities. And it was just assumed to be true. And in the world we're heading into, you know, that we're arguably already in, you know, there are going to be these, you know, new forces, these new entities running around doing things. And, you know, we're going to just...we're going to struggle and we're going to, you know, we're going to catastrophize. We're going to conclude, you know, like, AI is the end of the world. The medievals would have said, oh, it's just another spirit, like, you know, it's just another kind of entity. Yeah. It's better than humans at some things, but so are angels. And so we're going to have to, like, change our mentality. We're almost going to have to become a little bit more medieval. We're going to have to open up our minds to the kinds of entities that we're dealing with. Wow. Yeah. Which also could help us actually deal with people. Like maybe there's an explanatory way to think about human behavior here that seems less rational but might actually be more rational. Well, you express yourself very brilliantly in describing the current state of woke ideology as a religion. That's right. And that the way you described it was brilliant because you were saying that it has all the elements, excommunication, adherence to a very strict doctrine, all these different aspects of it, saying things that everyone knows to be illogical and nonsensical, but you must repeat it. Right. You know, these things are indicative of people that are in cults or people that are a part of like a very, like a serious fundamental religion. Yeah. Well, I mean, of course, the big difference between woke and those traditional religions is woke has no concept of redemption. Right. It has no concept of forgiveness. Right. Which is a very evil religion. You do not want that to be the cornerstone of your religion, right? Yeah. It's also, well, it's ill-conceived, right? Yes. Because it's like immature. It's an immature religion. Yes. It's absolutist. It's inherently totalitarian. It has to be because it can permanently destroy people. Yeah. Woke also understands something that the Greeks understood, which is that being ostracized and being put to death are the same thing. And so when the Greeks sentenced somebody like Socrates to death, they gave them the option of just leaving. Really? Yes. Socrates could have just walked out and left. No kidding. But the reason that was considered equivalent sentences is because at that time, if you were not a citizen of a particular city, you would get killed in the next city. You'd be identified as the enemy.
Presumptively and killed and so there was no way to survive without being part of your community And and that's what the woke's figured out is you can do the same thing if you're able to like, you know Nail somebody on you know on charges of having done something, you know, unacceptably horrible Then you make them toxic and all of a sudden they can't you know, they can't have you sure You know people, you know, they lose friends. They lose family. Yeah, they can't get work You know before you know it like they're you know, living, you know, severely diminished damaged lives Some people then go on to kill themselves. I don't know if you've been paying attention at all to blue sky But I have multiple friends that have accounts on blue sky that are very sophisticated trolls and are Pushing like the woke agenda to a satirical point like to like parody Yeah But like on the edge where you're not quite sure they'll say enough real things that make sense and talk about their own anxieties and personal issues with stuff and then say Fucking ridiculous shit and it's Fascinating I bet it works. It does work. That's what's so terrifying It's like all the outcasts of Twitter all the people that were like, I can't take this a few of them will come back Which is wonderful. I love when they come back. I'm gone I'm gonna go to blue sky. Fuck you people like a bunch of them went to threads for a while Like Stephen King he went to threads came right back. They all come right back They can't the marketplace of ideas like okay You could go to like a fruit stand in the middle of the fucking desert and that's a marketplace Or you can go to the farmers market where everybody's there like, where are you gonna go? That's right You're gonna go to the farmers market. That's tons of people. It's a lot of fun. That's a lot of activity Yes, that fruit stands fucking barren and deserted. There's no one there. There's very few choices Yeah, yeah, it's not fun And it's win-win to have the most win-win to have the back on Twitter because it's good for them because they want to proselytize And so they need an audience. So they win and then we win because it's really really fun to dunk on them But it's also weird for them to not want any pushback at all Like don't it isn't the whole thing supposed to be about an exchange of ideas Like if you have a controversial idea and someone disagrees with it, don't you want to hear that position? I know I do I want to hear it. Even if I vehemently disagree with it. I want to hear it I want to know where how do you how's your brain work? How are you coming to these conclusions? What makes you think this way? Who are you? What do you like? I want to go on Instagram I want to look at your pictures. I want to see what you're up to. What are you doing? You know, yeah, we do you free time, you know, what are you complaining about? Yeah. Yeah, I want it's like it's a fascinating education on human psychology and To watch people express themselves publicly and then also be attacked publicly by strangers Which never happens in the real world it like at scale Yes The way it happens on social media and I think it's an amazing time for people to examine ideas If you can handle it, yeah, my favorite term is marketplace of idea. Yeah You could have a marketplace of ideas. It's just gonna be one idea All right, so blue sky is a marketplace of ideas. Sure. Yeah access the marketplace of ideas That final s makes a lot of difference. Yeah, right, but the thing about X's it really is diverse There's I follow tons of like kooky leftist progressive Nutbags that like have bizarre takes on everything Yeah, and they were a hundred percent convinced that Kamala Harris is gonna sweep all the swing states including, Iowa They were all in and I was like, this is wild. Yeah, like is that gonna happen? Are they right like this is crazy, but it's they were 100% convinced and it's it's fascinating to see all these different kinds of people to see the Charlie Kirk's and you know The the full-on left-wing kooks and see them all together, right? So what you need that? Yeah Look, so one of the ways I think to think about this is all new information is heretical By definition, right? So so anytime anybody has a new idea that it's a it's a threat to the existing power structure So all new ideas start as heresies And so if you don't have an environment that can tolerate heresies You're not gonna have new ideas and you're gonna end up with complete stagnation, right? If you have stagnation you're gonna go straight into decline Yeah, right and and I think this is that the aberrant nature. This is the timeline split I think that I think the last decade has just been like a really weird aberrant time where things have not been working like they should and and you know in 2015 Twitter called itself the free speech wing of the free speech party, right? And Ilan Ilan has not like Jake Ilan has restored it, right? He brought it back. He brought it back to something that everybody thought was completely normal ten years ago Yeah, and I think I hope this last ten years increasingly is just gonna feel like a bad dream Like I can't believe we tolerated the level of repression right and anger and you know emotional incontinence and you know Cancellation campaign emotional incontinence is a great term. Yes Diarrhea in your emotions just spraying rage in all directions And so I you know, I'm very at the moment at least very optimistic that there's a cultural change happening here That's even more profound than the political. I have a lot of respect and also sympathy for Jack Dorsey
I like him a lot as a human being. I think he's a brilliant guy, and I think he had very good intentions. But he was a part of a very large corporation, and he had an idea for a Wild West Twitter. He wanted to have two versions of Twitter. He wanted to have the Twitter that was pre-Elon, where there's moderation and you can't deadname someone and all that jazz. And then he wanted to have an additional Twitter that was essentially what X is now. And he just didn't have the ability to push that through with the board and the executives and all the people that were fully on board with woke ideology. Yeah. So the experience that people like Jack have had running these companies in the last decade has been, and I don't mean to let them off the hook for their decisions, but just the lived experience, as they say, of what these people's lives have been like is just daily pounding. Just every single day, it's like meteor strikes coming down from the sky, exploding around you, getting attacked from every conceivable direction, being called just incredibly horrible things, being attacked from many different directions. Well, he's already left Blue Sky. Well, yeah. So the irony of Jack is that Jack then created Blue Sky, which is kind of exactly the opposite of any way where he thought it. Oh, by the way, the new name for it, of course, is Blue Cry. Ah, I didn't know that. Exactly. Yeah. But he's also got, look, to his credit, he's still trying, and so he's got Nostr, which is another- What is it? It's called Nostr, N-O-S-T-R. Oh, okay. This is kind of new. It's actually his third. He's going to keep swinging. Full credit. He's going to keep swinging. And by the way, full credit, he supported Elon. Yes. It mixed up a little bit, but by and large, he's been very supportive and was very supportive at a key time. Well, I also found it fascinating that when there was any sort of a right-wing branch of that stuff, like Gab or any of these, they would immediately be infiltrated by bots as well, like my friends that troll on Blue Sky. But these are Nazis. These are Nazi bots. These are people that would just spew horrible hate. And then Gab would be labeled, oh, this is where the Nazis go. This is a right-wing psychopath social media app. Yeah. And I think, frankly, I think you get the same thing if you start out. I think if you start out overtly political on either side, I think that's what you end up with. Yes. And so that doesn't seem to be an effective route to market. It seems like you have to start from the beginning as a general purpose service, but you need to have some sense of the actual guardrails you're going to have around. And by the way, every social media service, internet service that ever works, there's always some content filters and restrictions because you can't have child porn, you can't have incitement to violence, you can't have terrorist recruitment. And even the First Amendment, there's like a dozen carve-outs that the Supreme Court has ruled on over time that are things like that, that you can't just say, I can't say, let's go join ISIS and let's go attack Washington. It's literally not allowed. So there's always some controls, but you need to have like a spine of steel if you're going to hold back the censorship pressure. And there's basically Substack, a company I'm involved in, is doing very well. I love Substack. Smaller than Twitter, but doing extremely well. Fantastic. And they've done a great job, I think, of holding the line on this stuff. Yes. And then obviously- And it's an amazing resource. There's so many brilliant people on Substack. I love Substack. I get a large percentage of my news from Substack. It's really good, and it's so valuable, and it's such a great place for people who are independent journalists and physicians and scientists to publish their ideas and actually get paid for it by the people who subscribe to it. I think it's fantastic. And there's lots of people on the far left and the far right. Yes. Right. So you actually have the full spread. When a far left person gets upset, somebody working in the New York Times is mad because they're not far left enough, they quit and they start Substack. And Substack welcomes them in, which is why they don't devolve into a gabber or something like that, because it really is a platform. It really does welcome all conversations. Well, it's also very difficult to subvert in that same way, because Substack is essays. You're reading people's essays and papers on things, and these are long form things that are very well, in a lot of cases, very well researched. And it's not the kind of thing you could just shit post on. There are comments, but it's just like they don't hold the weight that the actual article holds. Right. So my partners at work, they've observed that I tend to be able to inflame situations from time to time. I can tend to be provocative and get people really upset. And so the rule they've asked me to comply with is, I'm allowed to write essays, for example, in Substack, and I'm allowed to go on long form podcasts, but I'm not allowed to post. Really? Right. Exactly. You have rules. It's the rule. It's the rule. Now, by the way, I struggle against the rules, because I can't help myself from time to time. Why do they want you to have rules? Because otherwise I inflame people too much. I drive people too crazy. Do you do it on purpose? Sometimes. I mean, sometimes you have to. It's unintentional. Did you ever hear about when the entire country of India was mad at me? No! Oh, I spent one night with the entire country of India basically wanting to kill me. It was incredible. Oh my goodness. What happened? I mean, I was in a Twitter debate with somebody back when I was just posting freely on Twitter, and it was a debate about economics, and the topic of colonialism came up.
I made a comment in a long thread about colonialism, and it turns out the Indians are still extremely sensitive about the topic of colonialism, and I did not understand the mindset and the historical orientation, and I tripped a line. And I stayed up all night, and I went hyper-viral in every time zone in India. Every hour, there would be an entirely new activation. And I was like, front-page headline news, top-of-the-hour TV news, all the way across India. Wow. Yes, it was like a, I do not recommend this as an experience. By the way, I learned how many incredible Indian-American friends I have, because they all rallied to my side, and said, you know, Mark's not literally calling for the recolonization of India, like that was not actually. It was probably the language barrier as well, right? Language, and then just, my big one is just historical context. Americans have a different, we Americans experience history differently than almost everybody else. History for us is just like stuff that happened in the past that doesn't matter anymore, but a lot of other people around the world experience history as something that really still matters, like really matters to their life today. Yes. They just, they live in history more than we do. They have a deeper understanding of kind of how they got to where they were, and the things that happened to their parents and grandparents and ancestors. And so there's just, it's just, you know, I don't know if it's better or worse, it's just a different way of experiencing reality. Yeah. Anyway, I recommend learning that lesson not by enraging a billion people. I experienced a small version of that recently, because I said we shouldn't be using long range missiles on Russia and the Ukrainians, like, and Ukrainian bots, a bunch of people came after me. Because I was saying like the Biden administration, I was like, fuck these people. And then I think some people misconstrued that as fuck the Ukrainian people, which I absolutely was not saying. I was saying, fuck whoever in the last days of the presidencies decide to escalate this war, because it appears that that's what they've done. It appears that they're leaving Trump a giant mess, at the very least. So the good news is I am allowed to go on podcasts. I am allowed to. That's a good news. In the theory, it's your sub, bring it up though, because it's your sub stack thing. It's because it's basically, Mark, you need to explain yourself in long form. Yes. You can't just say a thing, exactly to your example, you can't just say a thing and have people extrapolate from it. Right. Because they'll extrapolate. It's not their fault, because you haven't, it's your fault, because you haven't explained it. Right. Right, and so if you write something long form, or if you go talk for three hours, at least you'll, the context will be there. And then if they want to get mad at you, that's fine. But you can point everybody to the transcript. And it's clear that that's not what you meant. Do you also think while you're writing how things could be misconstrued? So let me like do a really good job of being very clear about this. 100%. Yeah, you kind of have to. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. Yeah, like I had Jimmy Corsetti on the other day, and he is an expert in ancient history and ancient civilizations. And we had these fascinating subjects. And one of them that came up was the Nazis and their fascination with the occult. And so you had to like clearly say, fuck Hitler, okay, can I be really clear? Fuck Hitler and fuck the Nazis, okay? I have not in any way. Okay, now that we're clear, let's talk about where the swastika came from. Fuck Hitler, did I say fuck Hitler? Let me say it again, fuck Hitler. But the swastika is this ancient symbol. And it's like talking about like why did the Nazis have this fascination with the occult and with ancient civilizations? And so we got into it, but it was like one of those things where it's like, all right, we're hitting the third rail, everybody get your rubber boots on. Let's save everybody here. Yeah, I've got a friend in the entertainment business who is quite left-wing, but really likes World War II documentaries. And so he'll be like, yeah, I saw this great documentary last night about Hitler. And I'm like, I bet you did. You can't even have a copy of Mein Kampf in your house. Oh, a student, this is actually one of the Stanford crazy stories. A student at Stanford was reported to the disciplinary board, the civil whatever disciplinary board for reading a copy of Mein Kampf in the quad. Oh my God, that's so crazy. Which is a book that's been, you know, assigned for 80 years to college kids to like understand who these people were and like how to not do that again. Yeah, that kid was like nearly brought up in charges and nearly expelled. So like, yeah, that's, yes, this is the world that I hope that we're leaving. Well, it's just an awful way to look at things. It's so awful to think that if you read about someone horrible, you support them. It's just so crazy. Like, well, how are we gonna study history? Yeah, right. And how are we gonna prevent bad things from happening again if we can't wrap our heads around why they happened the first time? Especially something like the Nazis. Like how are we gonna learn like what happened? Clearly 1920s Germany was very different than 1945 Germany. What the fuck happened in 25 years? So what we're essentially talking about the year 1999 America versus 2024 America. Imagine a shift of that magnitude, so crazy that there's a Holocaust in 2024. And in 1999, everybody's just hanging out. Yep, that's right. Well, you should probably study.
And you should probably not reprimand someone for reading a book on this. Yeah, that's right. Yeah, exactly. And look, the German people went along with it. Right? And so, you know, how did that happen? How did that happen? Right. And how many, you know, did they, was there active agreement? Was there passive agreement? Was there, you know, what? What are the steps where things go horribly wrong and how can we recognize those? Because those steps have taken place multiple times in history and recorded history. We know about them. So like if we see them happening today, maybe we should stop it and nip it at the bud. What better way than to read about when it already happened? Yeah. One of my observations about people talking about current events is we know conclusively the prior eras all had horrible moral problems, disasters, you know, catastrophes, wars and all kinds. They made all kinds of horrible mistakes. But we are completely certain that in our time we figured it all out. Right. Right. We're 100% convinced that we have it all dialed in. And the one thing I know for sure is people 50 years from now are going to look back on us and they're going to say, oh my God, those people were awful. 100%. Right. Just it's, but like in what way? Right. In what way are we horrible? I mean, certainly a lot of the way we treat each other is horrible, especially with the amount of information that we have available. But it is fascinating also that if you, you know, I visited Athens last years, last year, and I got to tour the ruins and I was like, oh, I wonder when it all went south. Like when did they, when did they know this had fallen apart? Like when, when was it in the peak of everything? They probably thought, hey, we have the most amazing, sophisticated civilization that's available on earth and we will maintain this. This is how we will be the center of intellectual discourse and the home of democracy. This is us. Yeah. Yeah. And then no. Now there's like shitty apartment buildings next to the Parthenon. You're like, what happened? Something horribly happened. And we don't want to think that could ever happen to us today. Right. We want to think we're American motherfucker. We're going to keep this bitch rolling forever. Leonard Skinner, free bird, let's go. Second amendment. Come on. We think that it's just, this is, this is the future. America is the shining star of the world and we're going to carry this on, but probably not. Like historically. I mean, what is the longest running dominant civilization ever? The Romans existed for what, a couple thousand years? Like how long did the Greeks run? How long did the Egyptian, the Egyptians might be the longest running, especially if you like take into account the possibility of alternative history timelines where they, you know, like Egyptian hieroglyphs, they have Kings that go back 30,000 years. Here it is. Egypt and Mesopotamia. There it is. One estimate measuring the time of the first pharaohs, the use of hieroglyph writing to the native religion was replaced by Christianity. Ancient Egyptian civilization endured for about 3,500 years, but I bet it was more than that. I mean, the argument is just things just really didn't really change. Like changes we understand, historical change of the kind that we understand where things actually change, the way people live changes, really kicked off with the Greeks. And so that was sort of the default status quo civilization for a long time. The Greeks kicked off change as we understand it and then, and then, and then, and then the Romans. Do you know about the fish ponds? The fish ponds. The fish ponds. The Cicero's fish ponds. No. So the Roman empire, you know, ran for, you know, in its sort of Roman Republican empire and it sort of helped what you consider as dynamic phase is sort of vital phase ran for a few, you know, a few hundred years, but maybe 400 years total, something like that. And towards the end, as it was sort of falling or stagnating and increasingly starting to fall apart, a friend of mine says when the roads got dangerous and nobody could quite explain why, right. Which sounds familiar, by the way, Cicero was, you know, one of the great, one of the great Roman statesmen. And he wrote these letters that we have and in the letters, he sends these letters to all of his aristocratic friends. The theme in the letters is basically all of the actual competent, capable citizens of Rome are out in the countryside at their villas, perfecting their fish ponds. Right. They've pulled it into themselves. They built themselves their own protected environments, right, where they control everything. And they're completely focused on ornamentation. They're completely focused on their clothes and on their, you know, lifestyles, right. Kardashians. They were Kardashians. I'm sure. I don't know if the Kardashians have fish ponds, but if they did, they would be spectacular fish ponds. They would be amazing fish ponds. I have no doubt they would be the most amazing fish ponds we have ever seen. So he kept railing, he's like, stop with the fish ponds. Like stop working on the fish, like get back out here, rejoin the Senate, like get back involved in the system. Let's keep this thing from caving in. Yes. And I think, you know, the significance I think of, you know, Trump actually talked about this on the campaign, you know, his version of this talking on the campaign trail is he's like, look, I could be off on a resort, I own all these golf clubs, I have many things I could be doing in my life. Yeah, of course. And he's 78 years old. He probably would like to do that. Right. And he's, you know, surrounded, his family loves him and like, you know, grandkids and like the whole thing. And he's like, look, I'm not doing it because like I need, I need, I need to do this. And it's interesting because, you know, he doesn't use, you know, he's not referencing Cicero when he says that, but it's, it's that spirit that Cicero talked about where, you know, when times get tough, do the people who are in a position to actually make positive 
of change actually step up or not, right? And I think we've had a pretty long stretch here where that hasn't been the case. And I think maybe with Trump, and then I think also with Ilan, I think, yeah, because he was the other guy, right? He, he for sure could what's a coalition, right? It's not just him. It's Vivek Ramaswamy. That's right. Another guy, by the way, who could be kicking it on a beach somewhere. 100% Yeah, very successful and young and handsome. Do whatever you want to do anything. Yeah, exactly. He's decided to go all in. And then you of course, you have Tulsi Gabbard. And you know, you have J.D. Vance, who I think is brilliant. You have all these brilliant people that are together, which is very hopeful. This is what we didn't see out of the Biden Harris campaign, right? You know, what we saw from Harris and waltz, you have waltz this guy who's, it seems like he's a compulsive liar. At the very least, he's lied multiple times about fairly insignificant things, you know, like whether or not he was a head coach or an assistant coach, and the lies have always elevated him socially, right? All the lies about his military service, or at least implying that he served in a different perspective in a different aspect. And then there was Tiananmen Square, this, everything enhances his virtue. This is not what anybody wants. You want the opposite. You know, you want a guy like J.D. Vance, who served in the Marines, and you know, went to Yale comes from a single mother with addiction problems rose from hard work and dedication to become who he is now like, that's the kind of guy that I like. Yeah, that's what we all would like, like, okay, that looks like a leader to me. Yeah. Yeah. Well, the Romans had this concept that took very seriously, they called virtue, right? And like, did you did you there's a whole ranking, by the way, the Roman virtues, and if you read them today, you just like want to burst out crying, because you're just like, Oh, my God, I can't believe what we're missing. But like, yes, people with virtue, people with virtue, it's not just that they think that they're good people, or that they tell everybody they're good people, they actually act on it and actually step up. Well, this is what's missing from today's secular society, right? Like, we don't have like a doctrine that in encourages that sort of thinking and behavior and rewards it publicly, which religion does, you know, what true Christianity, you know, not subverted, fucking giant arena Christianity, where the guys flying private jets and has Rolls Royces and shit, but actual, like real Christian people, right? Well, the Romans, the Romans had gods, I mean, their virtues had gods. Yeah. And so and so they're like, it was actually wrapped, it was your point, it was like encoded into their religion, it was wrapped up in their religion, they knew exactly what was expected of them, they knew exactly what their ancestors expected of them, they knew exactly what their gods expected of them. I recently read meditations again, a couple of months ago, I listened to it in the sauna. But it's it's brilliant. And it's it's amazing that this guy, Marcus Aurelius was thinking like this so many years ago. And it's so it's so valid today. It applies so well to modern life. It's so, so strange. You know, how brilliant this person was, while he was running this incredible empire that he could write about human psychology and the value of forgiveness and, you know, being true to yourself and constantly being truthful everywhere and everything you do and all these virtues and all these the stoicism that he that he espoused. It's it's so valuable today. It's really remarkable that this person who was a leader, was it 2000 years ago, that his words still ring true today. Yeah, you probably know, he didn't write it for public consumption. Right? Yeah. It was even more amazing. His private notebook, which is why it's so good, probably. Yeah. Because he probably wrote it for a sub stack. He'd like, well, people are gonna hate on this. Let me. Yeah. Let me, let me, you know, let me preemptively attack the people in the comments or right, so do them. But he's like, he's like, he's, he's, he's lecturing himself, like he's telling himself how to act, right? Like, you know, he's very, this very deep, these are very deep, important. My favorite, my favorite part of the meditations is there's a section where something like, yeah, you're gonna wake up this morning, and everybody's gonna hate you. And everybody's gonna lie to you. And everybody's gonna make dumb decisions. And you're going to be incredibly frustrated, and you're not going to get any credit for anything. And you have to get up anyway. Yeah, like, that's all Yes, yes, yes, that's all true. Right. And you still have to get up and do your job. And of course, he's saying that to himself as the leader of Rome to himself. Exactly. Yeah. And you know, and what's in there is just like, wow, his life was not, you know, he's just like, again, it's actually, you know, like the CEO, some, it's just like, you're gonna get pounded. Like, yeah, if you're in these positions, you're gonna get pounded every day. If you're operating out of a, out of a, out of a true sense of virtue, if you're operating out of a true sense of like, exercising your responsibilities, you get up and do it anyway. It's amazing how much it resonates. It really is. What's amazing how much so many ancient writings resonate, you know, there's so much valuable information, just like in Sun Tzu's The Art of War, or in the Book of Five Rings, you know, there's so many ancient books that you read and you go first, first of all, I love reading them, because I tried to imagine what, you know, what is this life like in, like, if you want to take like Miyamoto Musashi, 14
1400 when did he live Miyamoto Musashi? He was like 1420s or something like that like What's that like? Like what? What is your life like? What is what is the what is the view of the world when you you? Don't really have detailed maps or you don't have any photographs You don't have any idea what the fuck is going on in Europe unless you go there Like what is what is your version of the world like? Yeah, and then to see someone's words written down and you read them and try to just imagine yourself in their perspective in their mindset Yeah, that's right. Yeah, I look I think if you're somebody like that or somebody like Marcus Aurelius You just have this incredible sense of responsibility Yeah, like you the one thing you do have is a sense of purpose like, you know exactly why you're here You know exactly what your role is, you know exactly how you're supposed to behave You know exactly how you're supposed to basically gain glory how you're supposed to honor your ancestors Like it's it's just all you know exactly where you are in the community, right? Right, you know, right you you have this like incredible sense of groundedness and rootedness And of course, there's huge downsides to that which is it really cuts off your ability to you know, run off and you know You know go on American Idol, right? There's like a lot of things you can't do right but like, yeah, you know You know what you're supposed to do and you either do it or you don't do it And these days to have people like that we need people who choose to be that way Right, which is it which is a you know, which is arguably harder, right? Give it given all the choices that they actually choose to live that way Well, not only that giving all the distractions that people face every day that keeps them from sitting down and writing a journal like that Yeah, that's right. Yeah, you know, I mean back then there's not a lot of different things to entertain you with correct Yes, you had to be maybe a little bit more serious because you couldn't you couldn't have as much fun my favorite No, I have my other favorite Meditations Marcus Aurelius thing is uh, it's something like be the rocks on the shore at which though that which the waves beat Right, like yes, like yes your job is to stand there like the rocks do and just the surf just like keeps coming and keeps coming and Your job is just like stand there and take it imagine what it was like like addressing the people back then to just yelling out into these groups or speaking in front of all the leaders like Yeah, and I'll everyone's plotting to kill you. There's also a lot of that going. Yeah I mean how many times they try to kill Hitler? Like everybody's trying to kill you if you're if you're running things, yeah, all your generals are probably secretly wanting to become the king Yep. Yep, exactly. Yeah, all these surfers are waiting in the wings not easy lives, you know today today most of the killings happen metaphorically Although every now and then yeah Alternative timeline. Yes. Yes, exactly. That's right. That's right. Yeah How fearful were you leading up to the election that it wouldn't go into the new timeline? It was so weird because all the experts said it was 50-50 razor, you know razor-sharp, you know It's this tiny little, you know thing 80,000 votes in eight counties Yeah, and you know and then number one then it wasn't which means we can take all those experts and just dismiss them forever going forward because they Clearly have clearly have clearly have no clue. So it's another set of people. You don't have to listen to but I had this really interesting conversation that kept nagging at me with a senior Democrat who's on his way out of Of politics and he said in the summer I said how how certain is What's your view? And and this person said a Trump's gonna win with a hundred percent certainty. Really? Mr. Democrat And from a sort of purple state, right? So, you know, not New York or California, but like a state with sort of maybe broader cross-section of people and this person basically said yeah Look, it said look all you have to do is fly anywhere in the country into any purple and mark Place and go into a second or third tier, you know side city and take an uber for 30 minutes You know land at the airport take an uber drive around for 30 minutes come back and just ask the driver like how's it going? And who are they voting for and basically a hundred percent of the time the answer is gonna be Trump Because people are just people were just like completely fed up They were just completely fed up and then there was the you know Kamala enthusiasm which this person said, you know, the Kamala enthusiasm is like highly focused in New York and California Which don't matter from an electoral standpoint, right? So they're not gonna decide anything but that is huge when it comes to media. Oh sure, of course, but that's that's the thing It's the self-reinforcing nature of the bubble This is what's actually so interesting with these media bubbles is like the people in these media bubbles are not breaking out like It's like they're getting deeper into this sort of collective psychosis that they indulge in and part of it was getting excited about a candidate For which there was very little popular support for once you got outside of these, you know, heavily blue states Yeah, and so it is in a lot of ways is the most, you know, obvious explanation the world It's just people just fundamentally did not like the direction the country was going in and they were just fed up with it There's also this very bizarre arrogance of people that were certain that Kamala Harris was gonna win I'm sure you've seen the viral video of this lady Who's a political analyst who talks about going to the liquor store and buying a bottle of champagne? Yeah, I don't want to choke the poor lady. She's probably living in hell right now, but I'm blue sky Yeah, she's probably on blue sky she might be on it well she was on X I think she deleted her profile
Yeah, but the poor lady, I mean she but she was being very arrogant and she laughed and mocked this man and said you do Realize you wasted your vote, right? That's right. That's right. That's right. That's right. She left which makes her hard to feel. Sorry for that's right It's like you were you were ready to mock this man But in her eyes, it was all about reproductive freedom And she thought that that was under attack under the Trump administration and that women are gonna stand up and they're gonna stop that Because in her echo chamber, that was the case. Everybody was universally. They all agreed We're universally on board with this idea that Trump is evil We got to get rid of them and women are gonna vote and this is gonna be fun But like who are you hanging out with lady? Yeah, you know you could hang out with a bunch of people to think baseball is awesome Yeah, and then you know you run into someone from another country like what the fuck is baseball like you got to realize There's a lot of people out there Yeah And people really don't like being talked down to they really don't and they don't like you Mocking the fact that first of all, nobody wasted their vote Like that's not how it goes like you don't waste your vote if you vote different and the other side wins It's not how the other side won. That's all it is like Wasting the vote is a crazy way to look at it Like because I think also people look at things like tribal games, you know Like, you know in Texas is a huge football state and people love football and it's always we this we that when UT plays South-carolina we this we that it's like people love to be a part of a team that's winning and They apply that especially if they're not into sports to other things. I think it's just a war mentality It's a tribal war mentality that's been sort of subverted in the human mind and applied to other things It could be like Microsoft versus Apple, you know, it could be Android versus Apple, you know iOS It's weird how people get so tribal and then connect their own personal identity to other people agreeing With these ideas that they they believe yeah Yeah I don't know for two thoughts one is the Democrats for a long time with a big tent party So the Democrats were the coalition of people who had very different points of view on things and of course, you know famously It's all the different identity groups and it's all the different, you know economic and unions and all these things and Republicans were like the party of like rigidity, right? And just For whatever said a real lot of the woke stuff had a lot to do with it as it flipped to where at least today Trump's Republican Party is the Big Ten Party Yeah to your point on having all these new people and many of whom are former Democrats a lot of them and the Democrats have decided To try to isolate out anybody right who disagrees on any issue and demand right lockstep conformity through the cancellation process And so that that's a very interesting inversion that happened kind of without anybody saying anything about it But it did happen and then I think the other the other inversion was the economic conversion Remember the criticism of the Republican Party for a long time was it was the party of trickle-down economics? Yeah, the idea was the rich people are going to get all the money because Reagan taxes Reagan administration And then basically if poor people get any money, it's good because the rich people like trickle trickles, right? I think that inverted to where the Democrats especially in the last four years became the trickle-down party Which was we're gonna tax and we're gonna collect all the money and give it to the government and then we're gonna let the government Hand it out, right, but they did it under the guise of tax the rich they did it With this Robin Hood mentality at least they expressed, of course, that's how it starts But then you end up with thirty five trillion dollar federal debt You end up with this giant annual deficit and then you end up with all this money being handed out Right right out and all these grants and all these things like just this there's like shower of money coming from the government But of course if the government's giving you money It also means the government can take money away, right? Like if you're making somebody dependent on you because you're giving the money then you're in it You have a tremendous position of power because you can make their life horrible by pulling the money away, right? You can also control their ideology that way percent. Yeah, you own them like it's it's actually a form, you know It's it's it's on this it's on the spectrum to a form of like domination, right? No, this should make us very uncomfortable and so that and Maybe that would be fine if the debt if the debt in the deficit didn't out of control and inflation didn't get out of control But it did and then at that point it's like okay Like this this new kind of sort of tax and spend driven trickle-down economics is clearly not sustainable. It's not going to work So the way the Trump administration is going to approach the economy they want less regulation They want tariffs and less regulation and they want more More reliance on u.s. Energy, right? they want to drill more more natural gas more fracking more drilling for oil and then allow companies to To work without regulations inhibiting their performance. This will boost the economy You'll have more productivity. You have more American manufacturing. You have more things happening Yeah, so the two headline things you hear from them whenever they talk about the straight line things are number one growth You just need faster growth. But by the way, it's the only way to resolve a long-term fiscal situation It's the only way to resolve the debt. There's only two ways to do it You can inflate your way out of it and end up in 1930s Germany with hyperinflation like that That's one track you can get on which is a very bad track and you don't want to go there or you can grow faster Because if you grow faster Then your your economy can catch up to the debt and you can you can pay down the debt as you grow and so they
They wanna go for a higher rate of growth. And then the other thing is they want America to win. And this is, you know, my partner Ben and I were able to spend time with Trump this summer and that was like his adamant thinking kept coming back, which is like, look, America has to win. And specifically what that means is America has to win in business and in technology and in industry generally, globally. Like our company should be the ones that win these, you know, broad, we should win global markets. Like our company should be the global- How can anybody be against that? I happen to think that makes a lot of sense. Yes. I know, I mean, obviously you're a wealthy man and I am as well, but it's like, how could you not want that? Yes, by the way, if you are in favor of a high level of social support, if you want there to be lots of welfare programs and food assistance programs, all these things, I would argue you also want that because it's the growth that will pay for all the social programs, right? Like that's how you square the circle. That's how you actually have your cake and eat it too, which is like, first, your economy just generates a fountain of money through growth and economic success. And then you can pay for whatever programs you want. I actually don't, personally, like I'm totally fine. Like set up all the programs you want, all the social spending you want, all the safety nets you want. And as long as it's easy to pay for it because you're growing so fast, then everybody wins. Yeah, I mean, I've always said if I knew that I paid more taxes, people in the world, in this country would live better. I would do it. Right, of course. I just don't believe that they're good at spending it. That's the thing, right? Yeah. It's like, if you're putting in this, if you've generated 35 trillion of debt and these are the results. Yeah. Like this is not the deal. And this is my friend that I talked about earlier. That was the point he made. It's just like, look, the deal has been broken. Like this is not the deal anybody signed up for. This is not how it's supposed to work. Everybody knows it. And when you were talking about giving people social programs and giving them benefits, and then you could take that away at any moment. This was one of the big fears that people had about letting illegal immigrants into the country and moving them to swing states, which clearly happened, and also giving them a bunch of benefits, which clearly happened. Money, food stamps, housing, all that happened. Stuff that wasn't available to veterans, stuff that wasn't available to homeless people, wasn't available to the very poor of this country, all of a sudden people who came here illegally got those things. Right, that's right. And the thought was, if you gave these people these things and you gave them a way better life. Look, if I was living in a third world country with a family and I knew that I could come to America and I could get a job, an actual job, and make money and my family's gonna definitely eat, I'll vote for whoever the fuck you want me to vote for. I don't care. My life is infinitely better than it was in this totalitarian shithole that I was in until I walked here. I'll do whatever you want. I just want my family to survive and I think everything's gonna, it's so much better than where I was if I'm in some war-torn part of the world. It's so much better here. I don't care if the Democrats win or the Republicans. I'm in America. And if the Republicans didn't give me any money and they wanna get me out, they wanna deport me. But this nice lady, she gave me an EBT card and I'm staying at the Roosevelt Hotel in New York City and I can get a flight somewhere else if I wanna go there? Oh, this is wonderful. So that's how it starts and there is a lot of that going on. But I will say one of the things that's interesting is it doesn't necessarily stick that way. And the sort of evidence for that is the rapid, the sort of dramatic ramp up in the Hispanic vote for Trump. Well, Hispanic people generally are very hard workers. So this gets to the thing. So I'll just tell you a quick story on this. So after the night after the 2016 election, like literally everybody I knew was just like completely traumatized. Like we were all just like completely freaked out. Everybody was shocked. You were freaked out too? Yeah, I was completely freaked out. Everybody was freaked out. Like I didn't expect him to win the nomination. I didn't expect him to win the race. Like, and then, you know, and the media is on like full historical blast and it's the end of the world. And he's, you know, he's a Russian spy, all this crazy stuff that we now know not to be true. It's just like full on. So a group of us, a group of us went out to dinner at a restaurant in Palo Alto. And, you know, and the atmosphere was like a funeral. I mean, like everybody in the restaurant was just like despondent, like ready to slit their wrists. And so we're sitting there eating and like the food doesn't taste good. And, you know, it's just like, can't taste the food. You can't taste the drinks. Like everybody's just depressed. Wow. And, you know, it gets this thing of like, you know, my, you know, my God, I can't believe that, you know, Trump, you know, this, that, you know, so you see, you know, racist and, you know, anti-Hispanic and all this stuff. And it was, it was, it was one of those moments where the young waiter who's, you know, Hispanic young man in his twenties, one of those rare moments where he broke into the conversation at the table. Right? But it was in context. It was like, oh, thank God. Cause like, we're just, we're just depressing ourselves to death. So like, thank God he's going to say something. And he said, you know, I think you guys are looking at it all wrong. He was like, my father thinks Trump is fantastic. My father came here as an immigrant, whatever, 30 years ago, built a life here, became a citizen, bought into the system, pays taxes, like raised a family. Mowing his lawn with a MAGA hat on. He thinks this guy is great. He thinks this guy is fantastic. And he voted for him. And he just has, and, and, and, and, and, and then, you know, you've heard this before, but then it's like, and the thing that this guy said, the thing my father thinks is terrible is if other people are able to come here, they're able to cut in line. They, you know, they didn't have to go through the process. They didn't have to prove anything. They're not bought into the system.
They're able to jump in and then they're not buying into the system. And part of it may be they're not being accepted, but also part of it is they're not buying in. They're not assimilating. They're not becoming part of what makes America, America. And by the way, in some cases, the criminals are coming across and terrorists are coming across and gangs. And it's like, my father's not in favor of any of that. My father wants to be part of a great society, of a great America, not some dysfunctional, basically just disaster zone. And I remember the group of us, it was my first glimmer of like, okay, I need to like completely rethink my whole sense of like how the world works because- Is that one conversation? Yeah, yeah. Well, it was weird because it was like, so what happened to me is like, so I grew up in rural Wisconsin, which is now like completely Trump country. And so from like zero to 18, like I completely understood the mentality and I was always like explaining to my friends of like, no, no, like this is like a different place and people think differently. And then somehow between the ages of like 18 and 40 or whatever, I just like forgot. And I became a Californian. I became a fully assimilated Californian. And I was just like, well, of course, the Californians are much more sophisticated in advance than people where I came from. And so of course, of course, everybody in California has it figured out. And of course, California is going to lead the country in all this thinking, right? And Trump was for me, Trump 2016 was the wake up call of like, no, no, no, no, no, no. Like that's just like completely, that is such an impoverished worldview of how this country works and of how people think that it doesn't explain what you, because you have to explain what happened. And you have to like, if you have some sense of being able to predict what's next, which is what I'm supposed to be doing for a living, you know, that's what investing is supposed to be. It's like, okay, I got to rebuild my entire model of the world for like how, how, how this all works and how, how this whole system, how this country works. But it was that conversation that, that kickstarted it for me. So what was the process of altering your perspective or at least opening it up? Yeah. So for me, it was primarily, it was reading. And so I started to actually read my way back in history and I went, I actually went all the way back. It was like, where were the origins of like left-wing thought came from and then communism and how did that evolve and, you know, liberal democracy and then also right-wing thought and like, you know, everybody's calling everybody a fascist now. So like, what was fascism? Is that what this is? Right. How, how did, how did the Germans do with it? You know? So all, all of those questions and then, you know, kind of converging on in the last 80 years, like how is that, you know, either stabilized or not stabilized. And so I did that. But the other thing is I just started talking to a lot more people and I just stopped assuming that because I read it in the New York times that it was true and, you know, and, and by the way, and then of course what unfolded in the years, you know, kind of sense was, you know, the, the whole, I followed the whole Russiagate thing like super closely. Like I read everything and I read all the reports. What did you think initially? Did you think it was true? Cause it's like this overwhelming consensus from the entire expert class that of course he's a Russian spy. Right. I sat on stage, I went to Hillary's first post election loss speech, which she gave at Stanford. The very first one. And I sat, we know that people organizing it. So we sat literally like 15 feet from, from, from Hillary in her, in her first appearance. And it's, you know, the whole thing is fraught with just like incredible tension because, and the Russiagate stuff is in full, full blown, full blown display. And I, and I go there and I'm like, all right, this is going to mean to me. And you know, the, in the audience, the Stanford audience, and so it's all a hundred percent Hillary Clinton supporters and I, and I'm sitting there and I'm on my, I'm on my best behavior cause I'm with my wife and I have to like not, you know, I have to not act out. And Hillary gets up there and she says, Trump is only president today because Vladimir Putin hacked Facebook and made him the president. Right. And I'm sitting in the audience and I'm like on the Facebook board and I'm like, that's not like, that's not true. I know for an absolute fact that that's not true. Right. And so that got me thinking. And then the Russiagate stuff unspooled and I was like, you know, the whole, the, the, the, the, the steel dossier and like all this stuff comes out. What was the accusations about Facebook? How did she think that Russia hacked Facebook and made Trump the president? Yeah. So it's this whole thing with, it's just, I remember this whole thing, Cambridge Analytica. And so it's, it's this whole thing that there was this, basically there was this data, there was this theory, which by the way, it's like completely, it is like a completely fake thing. Like this didn't. So there was this data, there was this, there was this data set on user behavior that in theory there's an academic, there's a theory that you could sort of impute human behavior from this data set. And then you could use it to predict what people would do and how they would react to different kinds of messages. And it was like this like magical breakthrough and basically thought control. And then there was this company called Cambridge Analytica in the UK that figured out a way to do this. And then it was this like new kind of literally like mind control, like, you know, by far like the most powerful meme weapon of all time for getting people to vote the way that the way that you want. It was this data breach of face. The whole thing was weird because Facebook had been criticized for a decade leading up to 2016, that it kept all the data closed. Right? So the criticism was Facebook never lets any of the data, it doesn't share the data, right? And the criticism for years was Facebook is the Roche Motel of data. And the virtuous thing for it to do is to actually free the data and let everybody else have access to the data. And then in 2016, like flipped 180 degrees and it was Facebook is the most evil company of all time because it let Cambridge Analytica get access to this data. And then Russia ran basically a psychological operation on the American citizens using Facebook pushback. They did. It's just they did early on. They do today in their way. But you know, they're trying to run a business. They're trying to get to the next quarter. They're trying to get the employee base and everybody.
Copacetic they're trying not to get just completely destroyed by the politicians. They're getting right slammed every single day on every conceivable issue you can imagine and It's actually very interesting when you're in when you're in these companies like these these big issues are big issues But you're also literally trying to like make the quarter, right? You're right. You're trying to ship your products You're trying to close your sales. You're trying to keep your employees from quitting, right? You have these you have responsibilities, right? You have practical concern responsibilities and so sometimes these companies get kind of wedge because they can't do the things that they would do if they were just in damage And then they write and then they you know, then they and maybe the message doesn't get out But so what was a bigger shift the waiter or the Hillary speech? Oh, it was the waiter I mean by that it was the waiter was the much bigger shift because it was listening to a normal it was listening to a Person with their feet on the ground actually explaining the way the world worked. Whereas with Hillary it was it was Cope, right? It was it was delusion She that it was it was amazing. By the way, she then spent the next hour and a half When I when I'm in a place where I don't know if I'm gonna control myself I bring a little notepad along because I can work out my demons like Right like super bad, so I brought my little notepad My little pen little Fisher's Space pen, right? And I wrote out and I started making a list of all of the people and organizations that she blamed for her defeat that Were not named Hillary Clinton And I got to 20 My favorite was Netflix, by the way She blamed Netflix. What did Netflix do Netflix aired anti-clinton documentaries? Oh I mean facts. Well, this is particularly funny because the CEO Netflix is a famous Democrat. He's a super Democrat Democrat well, not actually Dead but also read specifically read read read Hastings and his wife are very enthusiastic left-wingers But I mean it was just this litany of you know Basically excuses and complaints right with no sense of like responsible personal responsibility at all You know just like pure grievance and so it was the negative was negative lesson of like, okay Like whatever that is is not the path. Did she blame Comey? Oh, yeah. Oh, absolutely. Yeah. Oh, yeah. She definitely hated that guy Yeah, no question. That was a wild one hundred percent. Yeah, exactly. And by the way, like that was super weird Yeah, you know, I don't think she was completely wrong. I don't understand that one Honestly, if they didn't want Trump to win, I don't get that one Well, she's good. She we know she's guilty, but we're not gonna charge her right is a weird. That's crazy It's a weird message Almost as weird as the Biden one where we don't think he's confident to stand trial For the documents that he had that were classified exactly, but he can what have his finger on the button The fuck are you talking about exactly? We know we know he's guilty But we never convict him because the jury would say that he's a senile old man Which is crazy because he's still running for president at the time. He's running for re-election well then remember everybody at the time said the media said that the prosecutor was lying right because we sharp as attack My favorite is Joe Scarborough. Yes. This is the best Biden Intellectually the best one I've ever seen like dude. Yes, and then meanwhile, he had to go to Mar-a-Lago and kiss the ring My favorite was the remember the about about earlier this year was the invention of the term cheap fake cheap fake Cuz everybody's worried about the AI deep fake which really didn't then there was really not nothing nothing happened to that And so the cheap fake we learned is a video that just simply shows you something Right It's claimed to be out of context, but it actually turns out that it's actually just telling you the truth She didn't Nancy Pelosi start using that one cheap fake. Yeah, exactly Well, because the theory was it was gonna be clips out of context Yeah, but it turned out there were clips in context. Have you seen there's a gentleman who made a video? Here, I'll send it to you It's pretty fucking crazy of what AI is capable of now by Come on on my phone updated you son of a bitch. Come on. Don't make me go to a fucking Android cuz I will This guy did this insane Video where it's all completely AI and everything he did Including his voice. It's here. I'll send it to you Jamie It's 100% AI generated and it's so hard to believe And it's so hard to believe because it's so good and It really puts you in this when you're talking about cheap fake. I just sent it to Jim cheap fakes and deep fakes Let's put the headphones on to watch this because it's so crazy We're at that moment where you cannot tell right and let's look at this one because it's pretty Extraordinary. This is the best version that I've seen so far. This is completely AI To speak like me one of our company I can okay text and it will sound like me Then I trained Haygen with a video of mine I input the audio file to generate a video based on my text the video you are watching right now is the result 100% generated in AI What do you think of that guys? I know this might sound crazy. How crazy is that? Oh, that's your company. That's him Yeah, that is
That's the AI generator. Yeah, yeah. That's right. That's right. That's right. So it's two companies. One of them, the voice is ours. And then there's another great company called Heygen that did the visuals. But yeah. No, that's right. That's nuts. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, this is part of the first internet election. Probably the first internet election will be the one that has this kind of thing actually in it where people get tricked. Why didn't they do that with Kamala Harris? Well, it turns out- They would have done an amazing job. They could have like really knocked it out of the park with a solid speech. They didn't, yeah. Just have her say it on the internet. Yes. There's a bunch of viral videos of her speaking so eloquently and perfectly. One would think. Exactly. That's the fear of the future. Right? Yeah. Yeah. And so I think that's going to be the kind of thing that's going to happen in terms of like the dirty trick side. I think that will be a part of it. Right? Yeah. There's always some way to try to game these things. Just have the most brilliant writers formulate, get AI to do it. Like you're saying, AI has all these solutions to things that are super logical. And well, there's no weird thinking in it. It's like cut all the fat out. So I think we have a theory on how to fix this. And the theory basically is we're going to have to switch our sense of what's real from basically just trying to eyeball it and figure out whether it's real to only taking seriously the things that we know are real. And the way that we would know things are real is we'll have them registered on a blockchain. Right? And so I think the way this is going to work in the future is every politician will have an account on a blockchain service, like a crypto service. And then every politician, whenever they say anything in public, whenever they're going to have people around them with cameras all the time, whenever they put out a statement, they're going to cryptographically sign it on the blockchain so that it can be validated that it is actually content from them. And then I think we're just going to have to reach an understanding that we're just going to have to write off everything else that we see. Wow. Which frankly is a good idea anyway, because there just is a lot of noise in the environment. How would you integrate that with social media though? Because one of the issues is these low information voters that are getting information either from clickbait headlines on these websites where they don't even read the actual paragraph which might be completely different than the headline itself. The headline is just inflammatory. And then viral videos. Like how would you? So the thing is, so that's already happening even pre-AI. Right? And so I would say that's a pre-existing problem. And so like we can't, you know, we can't. And by the way, that's been happening for a long time. Newspapers have been scandal sheets forever. If you go back hundreds of years to the first newspapers, they were running all kinds of scrollers. The first newspaper was a scandal sheet of the Vatican, like in the year 1500. And it was all these like terrible rumors about like the Pope and the bishops and all these, the Cardinals and all this. That was the first newspaper? That was the very first newspaper was in the Vatican. And then the American, all the American colonial newspapers were like that in the revolutionary era. It was all crazy rumors and innuendo and people accusing each other of, there was a famous election in 1800, which was Jefferson versus Adams that we think of as these like super upstanding, you know, upright people. And they're just like smearing the crap out of each other in their respective newspapers, right? Because they would actually own newspapers in those days. Oh God. And they would just attack each other. The more things change. Ben Franklin, Ben Franklin, Ben Franklin, you know, printed newspapers before he became a, became when a government and he created 15 different sock puppets, created 15 different pseudonyms. He was, he was a suit or a nun. And then he would basically have them argue with each other in his newspaper without telling people that it was all him. So he had all these different personalities. And so like, we've been in a world of like information warfare for a very long time. We've been in a world of sensationalists, you know, nightly news. If it was a, if it bleeds, it leads, you know, sensationalist stuff for a long time. We've been in the world of like, yeah, propaganda for a long time. So, so that, you know, that, that you're not going to, you're never going to make that go away. But isn't it funny that we don't think of the past like that? Oh yeah. We just assume. We think of them as being virtuous. We assume they had it all figured out. Yeah. That, that very much is not true. There's all kinds of crazy, crazy banana stuff. My favorite is in the Vietnam War, what was the, it was the, the Gulf of Tonkin that sort of kicked off the sort of big escalation of, like we now know for a fact it didn't happen. Right. It just didn't happen. And now there's this big debate about like, did they know it didn't happen or did, you know, did they fake, fake it? But like, so there's always been stuff like that in history. So that we can't fix and AI will be a new way to do that kind of thing. But what we can do is we can reorient people to say, okay, now you're going to have to like take seriously, this stuff is real. And if you want to actually know what's happening, this stuff is real and we can prove that it's real. And if it's not, it's entertainment and you can choose to believe it or not, but you should not rely on it. And look, it's not going to be perfect and it's going to take time, but there is, there is a way to address this. Okay. Okay. So that would be the solution to deepfakes the blockchain. Yeah. You flip it. You flip it. Yeah. You focus on the real stuff. That's logical. That actually does make sense. So that, that actually kind of gives me hope. I do generally have hope, even though I look at the pessimistic side of things, I'm generally optimistic because my real feeling about human beings is most people are good. I genuinely believe there's far more good people in the world than bad people. There's far more people that just want to live a good life and have a good time and enjoy themselves than there are people who are tyrants. Yeah. I'm super optimistic. I'm incredibly optimistic. And I was optimistic already with flashes of pessimism, but like I'm really optimistic and especially now.
So I think this is gonna be I think we have the real we have the real potential here for Golden Age Like we really do really do. Yeah the capabilities that we have and the people that we I mean look in my day job I meet these young, you know I meet these 22 year olds every day that are just like the smartest people in the world It's as far as people I've ever met. I think they're getting better. By the way as time passes there by the time They're 22. They just know a lot more. Mmm. They have so much more access to information than we did Yeah, there's so much better train capable and ready to go Yeah fire it up and they know each other able to connect online and they're already in communities and they know how to help each other and so like yeah the productive and inventive Creative, you know aspect particularly of this country is just like there's never been anything like it in the world I think there's also the real potential for a shift in perspective a positive Patriotic shift in perspective that can happen in this country And if you think about What happened with the woke ideology how it swept so quickly over the country and changed so many aspects of the way we deal with? Things socially it happened so radically and so quickly in such a large change that people are Susceptible to change it's possible to To enact change and a positive change in a good direction where people are optimistic about the future which you are and I am I mean, I think that's probably Contagious. Yeah, that's right. I really do think that it's an upward spiral It was Evan Hafer who said that thing about psychology the other day. It was one of is a friend of mine. Who's a former special forces guy said that Psychology is more contagious than the flu. Right? Right exactly. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Yeah, I think that's right So one of the interesting things that's going to happen right now, you know, we talked a lot about Trump's victory and Republicans But there's now a civil war that's kicked off inside the Democratic Party Which is very interesting because really they because they lost so badly, right? So they the fact that they lost the White House and they lost the popular vote and they lost the Congress and they lost the Senate and they lost the Supreme Court, right like this time It's undeniable that like the current path that they've been on is not working Like it's your foot like being an exclusionary party and kicking people out for wrong thing. Like it's not they're not gonna win election They're not just kicking people out. They're barring people from making it to the primaries. Yes, which is very undemocratic. That's right. That's right Yeah, exactly starting with Bernie in 2016 and then right continuing. So Donna Rice's book. She documented that right? Right, and so so like I would say the smart Democrats know that this is not it's not a viable path You can't have a political party that doesn't win. It doesn't make it's not it's not useful And so you there's gonna have there's a civil war that's underway inside that party that's kicking off right now Where they're gonna have to recalibrate Decide what they want their future to be and it's gonna be a big decision and the same thing happened by the way When Reagan beat Carter really badly in in 80 and then and then and then had a landslide in 84 It then took Democrats 12 years right to get to Bill Clinton and actually win again And so they have this cautionary tale of they went too far in the 60s and 70s and it took them 12 years to recover And so if you talk to the like really smart Democrats right now, they're like look this can't be 12 years. That's crazy We have to do this a lot faster, but we have to reorient and we have to get back to Common sense we have to get back to normal. We have to get back to you know, sensible We were actually playing Bill Clinton debating during the elections of what year was that Jamie I Forget which it was when he first ran. What year did he first run? Oh, yeah So is the 92 and I'm like I vote for that guy. Yeah exactly heartbeat guys. Awesome Also, we played a clip of Hurley Clinton Hillary Clinton where she sounded more MAGA than anybody who's MAGA today She was talking about the penalties that illegal immigrants should face They should pay a stiff fine because they came in this country illegally and if they're a criminal They should be jailed or kicked out of the country without question Like all this was like so MAGA like this is so wild to hear from Hillary in 2008. Yep. That's right That's right. And and Hillary and Joe Biden and what Dianne Feinstein and all these people wanted to build a wall Uh-huh, there's that Dianne Feinstein our senator in California at the time very, you know, very left-wing She was down on the border like to photo ops in front of the wall It was being built like trying to take credit for it crazy. Yeah. Yeah, like 18 years ago. Yeah, and so so yeah so another reason for optimism is I think that they're gonna be able to pull their way back like I think they're gonna be able I think getting Losing this bad is very motivating to be able to pull your way back and become more normal And I think again that would be like I mean how great would it be if you had two parties that actually had like Yes Clinton was running up against Trump. Yes, exactly like he was so good We played that speech that he gave after sister sister soldier It's had a bunch of like very anti white things about white people and he gave this like super eloquent, but yet compassionate speech about this where he's very charitable about her position as being a young person and Not having the the best perspective on things. It was fucking brilliant Yeah, it's really like that's the guy like that's a president now by modern standards. Of course. He was a fascist. Yeah well, that's the because
Because fascism by definition is almost always applied to right-wing totalitarian governments, but it's really kind of just adherence to the state and enforcing a doctrine and forcing people to think and behave a very, which is what the left wing does. And then you talk about like being pro-war, well, who's more pro-war right now, Trump or the Biden administration? Clearly Trump is less pro-war. Clearly Trump wants to end the wars. Clearly Biden just allowed Ukraine to use long range missiles into Russia. Like this is, I don't know what's going on in terms of negotiations. I hear all kinds of different things, but if you looked at one side that is pushing for these wars and seems to be all in on it and the other side that's not, like the fucking polar shift is so dramatic. It's really weird. The free speech thing, which was always a tenant of the left-wing party, it was like, you know, I mean it was doctrine. Like free speech is necessary. It's the foundation of our ability to discuss and find out what's right and what's wrong. You have to be, I mean, the ADL used to let fucking Nazis speak. They used to let them march. They would defend their right to do it. Right. Right. Yeah. Because you needed to air out the idea to be able to show why it was wrong. Exactly. Yeah. So look, it was not that long ago when you had Democrats that were very much in favor of many of these extremely sensible positions. Super recent. It was pretty recent. Yeah. I, but again, reason for, I don't know if they're going to, I don't know if they're going to pull it off. They might just get, they might go crazier. Like they might just go right off the cliff. Like it's certainly possible, but like it is also possible that they'll drag it back and it might happen quite quickly. And I'm, I am hopeful and optimistic. I am as well. I think the temperature of society, like the mindset of society is so clearly moving away from that madness that they're going to have to course correct, which is just logical. There's no way they're going to keep doing it the same way or double down. They're just not going to, it's like they're going to go to the way that MSNBC, they're going to become ridiculous. Yeah. That's right. So they have to, which is good for everyone. For everyone. So one of my theories is you can separate the concepts of the United States and America and you can be very optimistic about America and have all kinds of issues with the United States, but still be positive about America. And the difference is the United States is the formal system of the government and the politics and all this stuff we get mad about in America is the people, right? And so you can be, as I am, incredibly bullish about the people. And then it's just a question of whether, on the America part, and that's just a question of whether you can get the United States part kind of lined up to at least not prevent good things from happening and ideally help good things. Well, what are the things that you think about this administration, at least what they're proposing that would move us in that direction as opposed to the way things were going? There's a lot of things. I mean, so yeah, I think you got to start with the DOGE, the Department of Government Efficiency that, you know, Ilan. I think it's hilarious that it just winds up being DOGE, D-O-G-E, he's been pushing Dogecoin forever. The universe speaks. Yeah. It's just so, so many things are just so on the nose that you're like, is the simulation real? Yes. I mean, it has to be real. Yes, exactly. Exactly. And Ilan is programming it in the back room late at night in between playing Diablo. We certainly got a good position in the game. And tweeting, exactly. He's the number one Diablo player in the world right now, by the way. Exactly. He just got number one. Which means- Fucking bananas. How does he have the time to do that? Yeah. Yeah. So look, this goes back to what we were talking about before, like it just, it is time to carve this government back in size and scope. It's time to take the overall, you know, you could talk about distribution of taxes, but it's time to take the overall tax load down. It's time to take the spending down. It's time to get the government out of the position of deciding who gets money. It's time to unleash economic growth. Ilan explained that there's more agencies than there have been years of the United States. Correct. Yeah. 450 federal agencies and two new ones a year. And then my favorite twist is we have this thing called independent federal agencies. So like, for example, we have this thing called the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau, CFPB, which was the, it's sort of Elizabeth Warren's personal agency that she gets to control. And it's an independent agency that just gets to run and do whatever it wants, right? And if you read the constitution, like there is no such thing as independent agency. And yet there it is. What does her agency do? Whatever she wants. What does it do though? It basically terrorize financial institutions, prevent new competition, new startups that want to compete with the big banks. Really? Oh yeah. 100%. How so? Just terrorizing anybody who tries to do anything new in financial services. Can you give me an example? You know, debanking. This is where a lot of the debanking comes from is these agencies. So debanking is when you as either a person or your company are literally kicked out of the banking system. Like they did to Kanye. Exactly. Like they did to Kanye. My partner Ben's father has been debanked. Really? By an employee. For what? For having the wrong politics. For saying unacceptable things. Under current banking regulations ... Okay, here's a great thing. Under current banking regulations, after all the reforms of the last 20 years, there's now a category called a politically exposed person, PEP. And if you are a PEP, you are required by financial regulators to kick them out of your bank. What? 
politically on the left. Well, that's fine. No. Really? Because they're not politically exposed. So no one on the left gets debanked? I have not heard of a single instance of anybody on the left getting debanked. Can you tell me what the person that you know did, what they said that got them debanked? Oh, well, I mean, David Horowitz is a right-wing, you know, he's pro-Trump, I mean, he's said all kinds of things. You know, he's been very anti-Islamic terrorism, he's been very worried about immigration, all these things. And they debanked him for that? Yeah, they debanked him. So you get kicked out of your bank account, you get kicked out of the, you can't do credit card transactions. How is that legal? Well, exactly. So this is the thing. And so, and then you go to this thing of like, well, there's no, this is where the government and the companies get intertwined, back to your fascism point, which is, there's a constitutional amendment that says the government can't restrict your speech, but there's no constitutional amendment that says the government can't debank you. Right? And so if they can't do the one thing, they do the other thing. And then they don't have to debank you, they just have to put pressure on the private company banks to do it. And then the private company banks do it because they're expected to. But the government gets to say, we didn't do it. It was the private company that did it. And of course, J.P. Morgan can decide who they want to have as customers. Of course. Right? Is their private company. And so it's this sleight of hand that happens. So it's basically, it's a privatized sanctions regime that lets bureaucrats do to American citizens the same thing that we do to Iran, kick you out of the financial system. And so this has been happening to all the crypto entrepreneurs in the last four years. This has been happening to a lot of the fintech entrepreneurs, anybody trying to start any kind of new banking service, because they're trying to protect the big banks. And then this has been happening, by the way, also in legal fields of economic activity that they don't like. And so a lot of this started about 15 years ago with this thing called Operation Truck Point, where they decided to, as marijuana started to become legal, as prostitution started to become legal, and then guns, which there's always a fight about, under the Obama administration, they started to debank legal marijuana businesses, escort businesses, and then gun shops, just like your gun manufacturers, and just like you're done, you're out of the banking system. So if you're running a medical marijuana dispensary in 2012, guess what, you're doing your business all in cash, because you literally can't get a bank account, you can't get a visa terminal, you can't process transactions, you can't do payroll, you can't do direct deposit, you can't get insurance, you've been sanctioned, none of that stuff is available. And then this administration extended that concept to apply it to tech founders, crypto founders, and then just generally political opponents. So that's been super pernicious. I wasn't aware of that. Oh, 100%. So it was Operation Truck Point 1.0, was 15 years ago, against the pot and the guns. Truck Point 2.0 is primarily against their political enemies, and then to their disfavored tech startups. And it's hit the tech world hard, we've had like 30 founders debanked in the last four years. Real? Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's been a big recurring pattern. 30? This is one of the reasons why we ended up supporting Trump, it's like we just can't live in this world. We can't live in a world where somebody starts a company that's a completely legal thing, and then they literally get sanctioned and embargoed by the United States government through a completely unaccountable, by the way, no due process, none of this is written down, there's no rules, there's no court, there's no decision process, there's no appeal. Who do you appeal to? Who do you go to to get your bank account back? And then there's also the civil asset forfeiture side of it, which is the other side, and that doesn't happen to us, but that happens to people in a lot of places now who get arrested and all of a sudden the state takes their money. Yes, that happens to people if they get pulled over and they have a large amount of cash in some states. Yeah, right. Or there'll be, there've been well-publicized examples of there'll be some investigation into safe deposit boxes, and the next thing you know the feds have seized all the contents of the safe deposit boxes and that stuff never gets returned. And so it's this, and this is when Trump says the deep state, the way we would describe it is it's administrative power. It's political power being administered, not through legislation, right? So there's no defined law that covers this. It's not through regulation, right? There's nothing you can, you can't go sue a regulator to fix this. It's not through any kind of court judgment. It's just raw power. It's just raw administrative power. It's the government or politicians just deciding that things are going to be a certain way and then they just apply pressure until they get it. So what happens to those 30 tech people that you know? They go into a different field, like try to do something different and try to, try to, try to get- Complete upending of your life. Yeah, complete upending of your life and try to, yeah, try to change your life. Try to get out of the, try to get away from the eye of Sauron. Try to get out of whatever zone got you into this and keep applying for new bank accounts at different banks and hope that at some point a bank will say, you know, okay, you know, it's okay. We've checked in. It's now all right. Whoa. But there's no- So what do they do with their money? Like what happens? I mean, you go to cash. I mean- Oh, you can't have a- Yeah. So where do you put it? I don't know. Under your mattress? Yes, exactly. Yeah. Exactly. That is so insane. Yeah. So if someone has $30 million in the bank and they get de-banked-
Diamonds art, you know, do you I don't know go overseas somewhere. Holy shit. Yeah Yeah, yeah, and just like it just it just happens and again, it's really important. There's no fingerprints like there's no Right. There's no person who there's no stick above the strings. Yeah, exactly, right It just happened and we can trace it back because we understand exactly, you know We know we know that we know the politicians involved and we know how the agencies work and we know how the pressures applied and We know that these banks get phone calls and so forth And so we can loosely like we understand the flow of power as it happens But when you're on the receiving end of this your specific instance of it, like you can't trace it back There's nothing so these what are the instances like what is the company? What are they trying to do? And how do they run afoul all the crypto startups in the last basically four years so that you remember the crypto crypto thing got Like really, you know sort of everybody got excited and like entities and like all that stuff and right just like stopped Yeah, and the reason it stopped is because basically every crypto founder every crypto startup They either got debanked personally and forced out of the industry or their company got debanked And so it couldn't keep operating or they got prosecuted Charged or they got threatened with being in charged This is a fun. This is a fun twist There's a fun little twist the SC so the SEC sort of has been trying to kill the crypto industry under under Biden and this has been a big issue issue for Us because we're the biggest crypto and crypto startup investor The SEC can they can investigate you they can subpoena you they can prosecute you they can do all these things But they don't have to do any of those things to really damage you all they have to do is they issue what's called a Wells notice and The Wells notice is a notification that you may be charged at some point in the future Like you're like on notice that you might be doing something wrong and they might be coming after you at some point in the future Oh my god. Okay, so terrifying. Yeah, I the eye of Sauron is on you Now trying to be a company with a Wells notice doing business with anybody else. Oh my god, right Try to try to work with a big company try to get access to a bank try to do so That's when they support DEI initiatives and they yeah Well, then the SEC the SEC under Biden became a the SEC under Biden became a direct application of exactly so DEI they started they did a lot with that and then yes all the ESG stuff and ESG is a very malleable concept and they piled All kinds of new requirements into that So through that through this process the SEC could basically just simply dictate what companies do With no accountability at all. Like there's no You know, there's no over there's no over there hearings where they get yelled at but like nothing changed nothing ever happened in a hearing That ever changed anything Wow, it's just the raw application of power right And so this is your friends. This is happened to oh, yeah for sure Yeah, we had like I said, we had an employee who got debanked because he had crypto in his job title He was doing crypto policy for us and his bank booted him because he that's it because they did it They did as they did a screen across that. It's what they told us is they did a screen across their their customer base Anyone because because anybody with crypto became a politically exposed person because wow because crypto was was politically controversial, right? You hear that sometimes it's like complete these terms compliance reputation management, yeah Tone at the top they have these lovely sounding terms that make it sound like everybody's gonna be an upstanding citizen But what they're all code for is destroy the enemy Like bring the hammer of God and the bank and the government or whoever or the or the social media bring it down and just like crush the individual With no due process. Hey look There's an argument in the long run that this is all unconstitutional Because the Constitution gives us all the right to due process and this is government pressure and there's right So like there's probably a Supreme Court case in five years That's gonna find retroactively that this was all illegal. But in the moment when you're the guy who's been debanked Also the potential that if you do challenge them in court and lose the repercussions to be even heavier exactly Yeah, why is it really worth your effort? Yeah, is it worth the risk? That's right Especially if you've already had your life upended you ready to do it again. Yeah, that's right When you barely built yourself back up Yeah, so this is and I think this is important context or like when Elon and Vivek talk about like reducing regulation, you know There's two ways to think about reducing regulation. It's like oh my god The water in there are gonna get dirty and it's foods gonna get poison, right? Some of those regulations I think are very important But the other way to think about it is examples like this Which is just raw government power being applied to ordinary people who are just trying to live their lives are just trying to do something Legitimate and they're just on the wrong side of something the right one power have decided Well, there's something that isn't illegal, but they don't want to be done It's not crypto my crypto or having the wrong political points of view Well, the the trucker, you know, the other great examples the trucker strike up in Canada Yeah was an even more direct version of this because here you had truckers physically showing up and it was something like step one Was they take away your driver's license, which by the way, right? It's just somebody pressing a button on the keyboard No more driver's license. Step two is they take away your insurance and step three is they take away your kids Right, and so like that was their version of this and that was a very specific take away your kid That was the threat at the end to the truckers and the Canada trucker strike Because the truck because the trucker strike in Canada I was gonna jam up these cities because it was the farmers that were the truckers were very serious They wanted
to... They were doing a non-violent protest, but they wanted to stall the cities to be able to exert political pressure back on the government. And the government was like, we'll tolerate it for a little while, then we'll take your trucker license, then we'll take your insurance, then we'll take your kids. And- How did they say they would take their kids? Because it's administrative power. You can't... Right, the theory would be you can't let... These aren't good parents if they're sitting in a truck in the middle of Calgary preventing goods and services from reaching people, putting people's lives at risk. Wow. Child seizure. Child seizure. Now, I don't know if they actually seized any kids, but it's just an example of there is an agency in the Canadian government, just like in the US government, that if they want to, they can take your kids. Well, they were doing debanking there with people who donated to the trucker convoy. That's right. Which is even crazier. That's right. Not even people who were there, people who were opposed to the mandates that Trudeau's administration was imposing on people. And so they donated to these truckers, and then they got their bank accounts taken away, which is really crazy. And so... Exactly. I think the right way to think about this is when we think about totalitarianism, we think about literally World War II. We think about Nazis in jackboots with tanks and guns and beating people up and killing people. That's our mental... And you might call it that hard totalitarianism. That's very clearly violent totalitarianism. But there's this other version you might call soft totalitarianism, which is just rules and power exercised arbitrarily that just simply suppresses everything. And this is speech control and debanking and all these other things that we've been talking about. And the good news is they're not coming up and beating you up in the middle of the night. The bad news is you are under their complete control, and they can do whatever they want to you that doesn't involve physical violence, which basically includes the entire aspect of... Every aspect of how you actually conduct your life and support your family and get an income and everything else. And most people aren't even aware of it. Yeah, that's right. And then, look, these are individual one-off things. Most people don't have a voice. It's very hard to organize around these. And then, by the way, if there's an organization that organizes to try to get these stories out, it then itself can get suppressed and debanked. Well, it happened during the COVID lockdowns, right? So the lockdown protests all got suppressed, right? So the lockdown went from two weeks to crush the curve to two months to two years, right? Which is like, okay, what the hell, right? And then there were these protests that were forming up, nonviolent protests that were forming up to protest lockdowns. And you could argue the issue different ways, but people have a legitimate right to protest for that just like they do for anything else. And the next thing you know is all the lockdown protests got censored, just like, boop, gone. And so at that point, the normal process of being able to try to get redress from your government to enforce your rights to literally, for example, see your family all of a sudden, you can't even organize a protest. How much are you aware of what happened with the FTX crisis? Because one of the things that happened with the FTX thing was it was revealed that they were, I think they were the number two donor to the Democratic Party. Do you think that that is sort of a preemptive measure to avoid any of this debanking and be financially invested in these people so they're not going to come after you? That was his, it was explicitly his strategy. That was Sam's. Yeah. Sam's approach, Sam's approach was just pay everybody. So Sam's approach was just, I have $8 billion of customer funds that I can use for whatever I want, right? Which was the crime. Right. And then a big part of what he used, some of it he used to like hang out with celebrities and get Tom and Gisele to endorse FTX and the Larry David commercial and all this stuff. But a lot of that money, something like $150 million of that money went to basically just pay politicians. And a lot of that money was paid to politicians with no compliance at all with all the campaign finance regulations that the rest of us all have to comply with. And so the money was just shotgunned out the door. How come they don't have to comply? Well, it was illegal. I mean, it was illegal because he was breaking the law. I mean, it was, to be clear, he was illegal. Now, a very funny thing happened, which is when he was indicted by the US government, they ended up not charging him on campaign finance fraud. Because they'd have to give all the money back? Well, so there's two theories on it. The thing that they said was their extradition agreement with Bermuda, Bermuda threatened to not extradite him if they charged him on that charge. Which is like super weird because you're the United States of America, you can probably get the guy. Number two, did he really want to stay in a prison in Bermuda? Right. And so that was all weird. And then look, there's no evidence for this, but the other theory is, yeah, whoever are the powers that be that decide these things in DC decided to not open it. It's like the Epstein client list. Like there are certain boxes that are better not to open. Well, the campaign finance thing, wouldn't they have to pay it back? So then there's this like panic, the minute one of these scandals breaks like that, there's this panic rush. And all of a sudden, politicians discover philanthropic causes they can donate the money to. Right. And then, yeah, in the fullness of time, the trustees might come claw the money back. So yeah, it'll play out however it does. But it is it is interesting. It is a great example of it was the shotgunning of money into the system under like basically just like nakedly breaking the law. And then it now look, he's in prison.
So their argument is he's in prison, he's in prison already, like whatever, it just would have been another sentence. But he did break the law, and he was not actually charged on that, and that prosecution has not happened, and probably sitting here today never will. What's really fascinating about him is that he was right, and if they didn't come after him, he would have gotten all that money to those people. It seems like it kind of turned around, right? It didn't get him off the hook, though. It didn't? No. Well, he still did something illegal. He did, yeah. Did he know it was illegal? No, he didn't. He was in prison. I think it's really hard to get inside that guy's head. I don't know that I can represent his mental state. He'd be a fascinating podcast guest if he was out. He flopped very hard at trial. He had an explanation, but the jury didn't buy it. What was his explanation? That it was all the money was all being invested, and he was going to give it all back, and it was all this and all these complicated theories around all this effective altruism and this and that and the other thing, and the prosecution was just like, it was the customer's money. It wasn't your money. Right. What the fuck? Clearly. Yeah. I don't know. Well, there's also amphetamines involved, which definitely tend to skew your judgment. I mean, him and that lady were sort of proponents of amphetamine use. They were taking ... There was some anti-Parkinson's drug they were taking that has a side effect of reducing your risk calibration. Oh, dopamine agonists. Yeah. One of those. Yeah. Like Reaquip. Yeah. Something like that. Wow. He was taking these patches. That makes you do wild shit. That also makes people gamble. Yeah. Exactly. Well, yeah. Yeah. There was a guy who won a lawsuit from GlaxoSmithKline because he took Reaquip and became a gay sex and gambling addict. Yeah. I think they paid him the equivalent of like 500 plus thousand American dollars. I believe it was in Ireland. Yeah. Yeah. I think they're like, oh, these guys are weird. They do strange things to people. If that happened to me, I would definitely sue. That's crazy that those guys were taking those things. At least Sam was. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, boy. What a wild fella. Yeah. M. Sam. Confirmed. He wears an M. Sam patch. What's an M. Sam patch? He's supposed to use the depression medication. Oh, his supposed use of the depression medication had kicked up some rumors. So what is ... That's the stuff? That's the anti-Parkinson's? I think that was ... Yeah. Is that a dopamine agonist? Does it say? I'm not sure. I'll look it up on ... Yeah. See, put dopamine agonist. Yeah, Parkinson's. There we go. Yeah. Interesting. So it's like related. If it's not that, it's like a related classifier. Interesting. How does it work? Does it say how it works? Commonly used to depression. How does it work, though? Here we go. Okay. It's an MAO inhibitor. Interesting. Okay. That's a different one that says it's sledgeline- people take that as well as a nootropic I've heard. Yeah. That's what it is. So it isn't a sledgeline. Selagine? Selagine? Sledgeline? I think it's sledgeline. I knew a doctor who was taking that. He was taking it as a- but not in a patch, he was taking it in a pill form and he said it was a nootropic. So monoamine oxide inhibitor. So that's the stuff that's the active- that's what makes ayahuasca orally active. Same thing. Monoamine oxide inhibitor along with the plant that contains dimethyltryptamine, which is not normally orally active. So this guy, if he was doing drugs and taking MAO inhibitors, he was out of his fucking mind. Guaranteed. Because I know people who have taken like prescription grade MAO inhibitors and then taken mushrooms and literally almost never came back. Like got to the point where for weeks they were fucked up and then when they did come back they were like, I almost lost it. Like I was almost gone gone. Like you know, like the dude from Pink Floyd. Like never coming back, shine on you crazy diamond, you're gone. And that happens to people. So this fucking kid with billions of dollars of people's money is taking those kinds of medications and amphetamines and who knows what. Yeah. You know, he had an on-staff psychiatrist who was prescribing all this stuff. Wonderful. Like Hitler. And inside value. Exactly. Once again. Once again, back to Hitler. That's so crazy. What a wild boy. Are you following the theories that are now emerging around ozempic and psychological changes that ozempic causes? No, but I did read that it makes your heart shrink. Well, there's some theory to that, which is very concerning, but there's a fair amount of evidence that it resolves alcohol addiction, certain forms of drug addiction, and gambling addictions. And the current theory is that what it does is it basically, it essentially increases your self-control, your self-discipline, and it reduces cravings. 
There's a theory that this is very positive. Let's say this is true, which is what they think right now We'll see but that's what they think So the theory that it's positive is the theory that you know If we were all like more responsible in our lives, we'd all be more successful in society would go better. Yeah counter-argument would be like Responsible is only part of living and it's only part of what makes a society work and we also need risk-taking and we need creativity Yeah, we need impulsiveness. Yes, right and we need variety. Yes, and maybe we're all gonna get into a channel Right, right and maybe we're not gonna like where that where that that just by itself ends up Yeah, you can't have everybody discipline. You have to have wild fuckers out there. Yeah, that's right You have to have your jelly rolls of the world crazy people. They're fun. They make things more interesting. That's right Yeah, so it's essentially discipline and you know a pill form or an injectable form Yeah, and it's very helpful rather prescribed increasingly starting to prescribe it to alcoholics and apparently it's working quite well. That's crazy Well, that's that brings me to Ibogaine which is the one thing that has like the most success for people with addictions It's illegal in this country people go down to Mexico and go to these Ibogaine retreats. It's apparently I haven't done it But it's apparently this insane Introspective journey, that's very uncomfortable and it lasts about 24 hours It's not something that's addictive in any way shape or form almost everyone says it's a very uncomfortable experience, but you gain Unbelievable insight into What is wrong with you that makes you want to pick up heroin like what it what's going on in there that you're trying to? escape like what is this pen it Recognizes that pathway and puts a chemical stop there It actually like stops people from having addictive cravings and it rewires the way they think about things particularly beneficial to veterans a lot of veterans who have just seen way too much and come over and they're all fucked up and they Don't have any way to straighten their brain out and they've had tremendous Benefits using that, you know, I wonder with particularly with these These ozempics and Waco V and all these different types of weight loss diabetic drugs I wonder if there's a way to mitigate these side effects because you know when I've talked to people that Think that like my friend Brigham Brigham Bueller who runs weights too he he's Concerned about side effects of it, but he's also he looks at people that are Just morbidly obese and he's like these people they need some fucking help They've gone down this terrible road. Yes. They shouldn't have done it. Yes. Okay. We all agree to that Don't don't eat pie all day But if you've gotten to 500 pounds, you're probably you're in a bad state and you could probably use some help And maybe that could get them back on track And maybe there's a way with maybe strength training because one of the things is they lose a large percentage of muscle mass and bone Density, maybe that could be mitigated with strength training Maybe it's one of those things like if you're going to get on an ozempic you must lift weights three times a week Which is that might be it. I mean if it's just losing tissue, there's certainly that's that's Relatively easy to fix right? That's right. And there's by the way, there's a ton of R&D going into these drugs right now So there's any more versions of these things? I'm hopeful that we could develop something where no one can ever be obese again. Yeah, that would be really interesting I mean, maybe this is just the first steps of this right and then like these are crude versions of what will ultimately be a Very comprehensive way of addressing an issue like that Yeah So the other thing I'd say so I've been down in Florida the last couple weeks working on some of the you know stuff Happening down there and I one of the things I learned is that the RFK the RFK is really in charge Of health for the country from here, you know for like he's really in charge and you know working with the president and He you know for all the controversy around some of his positions like he's you know, this whole Maha, like he's very serious about this. Mm-hmm And a lot of people including a lot of the most qualified people I know in the field are like yes It is long overdue that we look at the food system. Yes, and we look at all these all Whatever to your point the horrible track that we've been on for 40 years. Yeah, just a complete catastrophe And I think it's a there's this concept in psychology called common knowledge Which is it's like it's something that everybody knows but yet nobody states out loud And so it like it's like known but then all of a sudden there's a tipping point all of a sudden It's not only known but it's like obvious all of a sudden everybody agrees on it Yes, and this feels like one of those moments where it's like nutrition behavioral, you know Exercise like the path that people are on to become obese like no like this actually needs to be addressed Yeah, this is actually a profound issue and it's yes It's we're on the road to hell and like it has to get fixed and maybe it gets it gets fixed chemically and maybe it Behaviorally or other things maybe the culture has to change but like it has to get fixed I'm actually I've been very encouraged that that like I think this is not going to be a very big focus here and not just By the government, but I think also in the culture I agree and I'm very encouraged as well And I think as we were talking before about a sort of a shift in perspective of the country I think a shift in perspective of the country towards that being something that you should strive towards. I think that's coming, too I think that's happening right now one of the
happiest moments for me is when I run into someone and they said they were inspired to get fit and healthy from listening to me talking about the benefits of it. And I've talked to so many people that have lost 100 pounds, 150 pounds, they're exercising regularly, they eat healthy, it's fantastic. It's one of my favorite things when I run into people that are fans of the podcast. So one of my theories on this is that, part of this is what happened is, something very specific happened during COVID, which is the public health people by and large looked very unhealthy. Yes, right. They didn't look good. Right. And so you've got these people standing up there telling everybody how they've got to do all the lockdowns and the masks and all that stuff. Yeah, Bill Gates should get jacked. That would be very helpful. He's got a lot of money. It would be extremely helpful. Get a trainer. When he writes the book and goes on the press tour to talk about public health. Stop eating fake meat, get a trainer. That would be great. By the way, it'd be great for him and his family and society. It would be very reassuring. Bill Gates had a six pack. I'd listen to him more. That I think would be absolutely, absolutely fantastic. And so like, it's just this thing. It's just like, well, of course. Like, yes, the people who are telling us all how to live and eat ought to be healthy. Right. And if they're not like- Clearly. And that's where RFK comes in play. 100%. He looks fantastic. Yeah, he looks great. He looks great. Yeah. Yeah. It's just like, wow. Yeah. We're taking pictures. I'm like, dude, you're jacked. I'm gonna put my arm on him. I'm like, you're fucking jacked, dude. Look at you. Yeah, exactly. It's like Venice. There we go. With jeans on. Awesome. Where's that with jeans on? That's old school. I don't get that. That's amazing. That seems weird. It seems like it gets in the way of your squats unless you're wearing like, like origin jeans. Stretchy. It's got a lot of stretchy fabric to it. Stretchy jeans. Stretchy jeans. You know, you gotta, you have to give stretchy jeans, but even then, like, put some shorts on, you fucking weirdo. Like, what are you doing, man? No, it's like, it's like, that's like, that's like, that's like prison yard credibility. It is. That's like, it's fantastic. It is a little, it is a little street cred-y. Old school. You know? Wearing Timbalands. Yes. Timbalands and a pair of jeans and doing your squats. It's kind of crazy. Exactly. But the promotion of health is like, I don't know how anybody could be against that. Do you want more energy? Do you want more vitality in your life? Well, you should be healthier. It's like, you're lit, you have, your body's a race car, and you could choose, if you work hard enough, to jack up the horsepower. Right. You can make better brakes. You can have a better fuel injection system. Like, the whole thing could work way better. Yeah. You just work at it. And that is your vehicle for propelling you through this life. It'll give you more energy for creativity, more energy for your family, more energy for your hobbies, your recreations, time with your friends. You'll literally have more energy as a human, which is what we all like. Nobody likes waking up and feeling like shit. I mean, everybody's been hungover who's had a few drinks, and you wake up in the morning like, what am I doing? I don't ever want to do this again. Why did I do this to myself? And then you can't wait for the day when you feel better. Yeah. Like, you drink your electrolytes, you get your sleep, you do whatever the fuck you can. And you're like, I'll be over this soon. Go, oh, your head, oh. And you know, everybody likes having more energy. It's better for you. And we can promote that as a society. And this RFK Jr. appointment is a really big step in that direction that we've really never had before. That's right, yeah. You have to go back to, like, literally his uncle. JFK had a program like this in, like, 1962. Yeah. It's been a long time. Well, Michelle Obama did for a bit, right? A little bit, although that was like vegetarian, you know, you're getting into, like, vegetarian school. Oh, was she saying vegetarian? I don't know if she was vegetarian, but, like, well, Eric Adams, you know, the mayor of New York, he's been trying to push vegetarian school lunches. Ugh. It's like, no. That's not right. No, that's not right. It's so dumb. I can't wait until they can figure out that plants really can think and feel. Right, exactly. Because they're real close. They're real close to proving that. I mean, they've demonstrated intelligence and allocation of resources through mycelium. There's a lot of stuff that we know now about plants that we didn't know then. I think they're all conscious. I think everything's conscious. Yeah, I think we need audio recordings of the screams. Yeah. When you mow the lawn, it's just like Armageddon. You know that they can play audio recordings of caterpillars eating leaves and it changes the flavor profile of all the plants around it? Awesome. Oh, amazing. Yeah, they've done this because there's a phenomenon when giraffes, if giraffes are eating, if they are upwind and they're eating leaves as the wind comes down and gets to the other acacia trees, the acacia trees will, they'll come up with this phytochemical. They produce a phytochemical that's disgusting to the giraffes and the giraffes will literally starve because they won't eat those trees. And they do this somehow or another through communication. It's like they're preventing war. They're being attacked by mammals and they're like, we have to stop the attack and nature has provided them with this mechanism to do that, which is really crazy. That's amazing. So back to the doge for a moment. So one of the reasons why everybody became unhealthy is because the government directly put itself into the food system and specifically high fructose corn syrup. Right, high fructose corn syrup was an artifact of government agriculture subsidies, right? The country was- Which was good during World War II because we needed food. At one time. Yeah. Right, but like by the 1970s, we were massively overproducing, specifically we were massively overproducing corn.
And the corn lobby, the sort of agriculture lobby, became very powerful. And we have this government agency. One of the 450 government agencies is the USDA, and the USDA has a dual mandate. It's to promote U.S. agriculture, specifically things like corn, and it's also to advise us on what we should eat. And they also do the Food Pyramid, and that's why the Food Pyramid is upside down, right, for all those decades, where we're supposed to eat carbs and not protein and fat, was because literally that's the agency that's responsible for promoting agriculture. And then that agency, it's inserted itself through laws, regulations, and this kind of administrative pressure, and basically said, thou shalt use high-fructose corn syrup because it is a byproduct of corn, as opposed to sugar. And as we now know, that was an absolutely poisonous decision. That was like literal poison, absolutely a ruinous decision, just an absolutely terrible idea. Well, K.C. Means was on here, and she was explaining the very mechanism by which high-fructose corn syrup encourages overconsumption, and that it's essentially like it's an evolutionary thing that like where bears would eat like a bunch of berries to get fat for the winter. It's like these high-fructose corn syrup encourages you to overconsume. Yeah. We were not supposed to be eating this. Right. This was not supposed to happen. It would not have happened. Especially drinking it. 100%. Yeah, 100%. But this would not have happened had the government not made it happen. And so it traces directly back to a government decision to do that. Now, they didn't, of course, they didn't understand the consequences, but that's kind of the point, which is they interfered without understanding the consequences. And so that's the kind of thing where you look at it and you're just like, all right. And then you're 40 years later and you're still doing it. Right. And then at some point you know what the consequences are, and then at some point there's a question of whether they're being covered up. Right. Right. And it's just like, okay, at some point this has to stop. Right. And literally they just need to stop. Like they just need to stop subsidizing corn, they need to stop forcing the food companies to do this. They just need to stop. And so this goes back to like the regulatory reform thing, which is like there's just like a tremendous amount of this that may have been good intentioned at one point, but sitting here today we're living with these horrible downstream consequences and unless somebody steps in with a hammer, none of this is going to happen. And they also have the insane amount of money that's involved because R.J. Reynolds, these tobacco companies, when they were getting sanctioned, they were getting in trouble, they decided, well, let's buy all these food companies. And so now these same companies that lied about whether or not cigarettes are addictive and cause cancer, now these same companies are pushing super unhealthy food on people, or at least selling super unhealthy food to people, which I think you should be allowed to buy. Right. I think you should be allowed to buy whatever the fuck you want. I'm all for that, but I do think we should be like much more aware of what's actually going on, like you're saying, and why this stuff is in there in the first place. Right. Well, and then you get into these other, you know, more delicate questions, but it's like, okay, food assistance programs for like, you know, low-income people and low-income children. It's like, okay, should they be... Do we want little kids who have no control over this to end up on the receiving end of this food production pipeline paid for with government money and being 300 pounds by the time they're 18? Right. And cheaper than other food. And cheaper than other foods because they're subsidized. Right. Because they're subsidized. And so, and you just, you have this very perverse outcome where you have these government officials who have been standing up there for 40 years saying, we're protecting you, we're protecting you, and what's been happening is they've been poisoning us. Yeah. And so, like, stuff like it just needs to stop. And that's where you need something like the DOJ and somebody like President Trump. What would they be able to do to mitigate a lot of these issues? Like how would they, if you want to, would you make it illegal to put high-fructose corn syrup as an ingredient, or would you simply stop subsidizing? Like, and what would be, how would that work within the government? Like, how would you apply something like that? Yeah. So, there are two things you can do. Two of which involve direct action, and then the third is maybe even the most important. So, one is you can just stop doing things that are harmful. You can stop doing things, the government can stop subsidizing bad things. That's an example. Let me give you an example. This is a parallel thing. If you want to clean up the universities, you need to stop feeding them student loans. Right? Right. So, the government should stop paying for things that are clearly harmful. So that's one. And then two is, look, there may be a role for additional protections or prohibitions. And so, for example, maybe you let people freely buy all the Oreos they want, but maybe you can't get them with food assistance programs so that, you know, kids who have no control over it are not being poisoned. And so, you know, you maybe do that. But I always think that the third thing is culture. Like, there's always a temptation with these discussions because the government's so powerful to talk about what the government does or doesn't do, and I think so much of this has to do with the culture. It's actually upstream or downstream from politics, which is like, what is the cultural tone of the country? Right. What's the value system? Right. What are the role models? Right. What are people being inspired to do? Also what form of shaming is in effect? Like, what are we not going to tolerate? Take the perverse fat studies. Like, are we going to glorify obesity? Right. Right. No. No. And that's not necessarily a legal judgment or a court case, but it's a cultural statement.
And it's not that the government should control the culture, but our leaders certainly play a big role in that, both in and outside of government. So for our leaders to step up at a moment like this and basically say, yeah, no, this is not the kind of culture we're going to have, it's not the kind of society we're going to have, it's not what kids should be looking up to, I think is just as powerful as the actual government actions. It's interesting you're saying the kind of shaming, because I don't want to shame anybody for being fat, but boy, does that work. Maybe you should shame parents. Fat shaming works. And maybe you should shame parents if their kids are fat. Yeah. But the problem is there's so many people that are ignorant as to what exactly is going on. Of course. And that's absolutely required. And they're being fed bullshit. 100%. And yes. But again, it's also cultural, which is like, okay, is the media thing, is the media educating people on this? And if the mainstream media is not doing it right, should there be new media sources that are? Yeah. And then therefore, which sources in the media get respect? So we have this giant collective culture question that we all get to ask and answer, and particularly those of us in a position to be able to send messages that a lot of people hear. So that will help. Yeah. That will help move the needle. But what specifically can RFK Jr. do once he actually gets in? Oh. I mean, there's- Oh, yeah. He's a secretary of HHS. He has very broad, I would say, a very broad ability to look at this holistically inside the government. What kind of pushback is there going to be against that? That seems like a wild amount of money is going to be lost. Yeah. So there's the work that the cabinet secretary is like he will be doing formally. And then there's the work that the DOJ and the president will be doing kind of in parallel with that. And there will be some convergence between those. And we'll see. There's a potential here for quite dramatic action on a lot of these fronts. Could you imagine if you're running an agency and you have to have a meeting with Vivek and Elon? Yes. And you got to open your books? Yes. Yes. It's like office space where they brought in the bobs for consulting. Yes. What do you do here? Exactly. That's exactly what it's like. Is there a meme like that? Is there a meme like that? I think there's a meme where they take those guys and they put Elon and Vivek's heads on them. Yes. So there was another key timeline split that happened in Silicon Valley about two years ago. Actually, two and a half years ago when Elon, actually right before he took over Twitter, where he got in an email fight with the CEO of Twitter at the time, who's actually a guy who's a friend of mine. He's a really good guy, but literally this guy had just been promoted from engineering to run the company. And then like a month later, he ends up trying to deal with the Elon situation. So kind of got a little bit sandbagged on it. But yes. Of course he said, Elon Musk says he rewatched office space to prepare for Doge. Of course he did. Of course he did. Fucking psycho. Exactly. God, we're so lucky that guy's around. Exactly. There's this moment in the Twitter takeover where Elon sends his email and he says, and the line is, what did you get done this week? Whoa. What did you get done this week? And in the context of Silicon Valley companies, that was a provocative statement because a lot of Silicon Valley companies take months or years to do anything. But imagine that statement being applied to the government. Oh my God. Right? Like the level of like accelerated, like, okay, what are the problems? How are we going to fix them? And what have you gotten done this week? Yeah. You think debanking upended some lives? Yes, exactly. So yes. What have you done this week? And by the way, when Elon runs this guy, it's actually interesting. A guy just tweeted, a guy just tweeted or posted or Zeded what it's like to work for Elon at his AI company, XAI. And he said, Elon came in last week and he said, Elon spent 18 hours at the office and in five minute chunks. And it was every five, each person had a five minute speaking slot to explain to Elon what they were doing. Wow. And he did that for, you know, five times, whatever, right? 18 hours. Jesus Christ. And so think about what that meant. Every employee had an opportunity to tell the big boss what they were working on. Every employee had an opportunity to be recognized for their effort. Every employee had an opportunity to get live feedback from the big boss who had a comprehensive overview of everything as to what they should be doing. Whoa. And there's no place to hide. Right. Whoa. I think about different it is for a company to be run that way. Right. Then even again, the Valley companies generally are quite well run by sort of business standards. And even that, like that's a level of intensity that most Valley companies aren't even close to. So imagine that applied to government, to government, and it's just, and it's, and again, this is the kind of thing. There's no law that like, there's no reason it can't be done. There's no law that prevents that. There's nothing in the constitution that says you can't do that. It's a choice. How the government is run as a choice on the part of the executive branch and the president for how it's going to get run. And there's no reason why the government can't literally be run, be run this way. And here's what's crazy. The pushback against even the concept of this by leftists. So leftists defending bureaucratic bloat and big government is wild to watch, which they really shouldn't be doing, which is a weird thing to have wedged themselves into. My hope is they'll figure out how weird this is. Do you think it's like just an ideological thing? Like the right wants this. So we oppose it. I think, I think they. 
think the left thinks they control the government. Like, I think 50 years ago, they would have been on the other side of this, of this issue. Like, like Noam Chomsky 50 years ago, of course, would have been on the other side of this. He would have viewed government power as an extension of like the state and big business intertwined. And you have these texts just term manufacturing of consent, where it's like government and business are conspiring against you. Yeah, so he would have been on the other side of this. But I think today's leftists think they control the government, which in many ways they do. Well, so Washington, DC, Washington, DC voted 94% for Kamala, 6% for Trump. Right. And so okay, so two data points that is data point number one data point number two, four of the 10 wealthiest counties in the country are suburbs of Washington, DC. Wow, lobbyists, lobbyists. Yeah, they call beltway bandits. Yeah. Crazy job is the actual term. And these aren't people working for the government. These are people making money from these are these are people sponging sponging off the government. And so, like, yeah, for to the extent that Democrats have wedged themselves into a position where they're defending this, they really shouldn't they should really rethink this, they should figure out how to get back to right the correct the correct mentality on this that they used to have. If there's less government bloat, then there's less tax dollars. You don't you don't have you don't need as much money to fund these things. That's right. There's like people can be taxed less, there can be more allocation of these funds towards the social programs that we all want. You know, most federal workers never came back to work. Really? Yeah, they work from home. Most most. Yeah, very large percentage, something like half just literally just never came back. Whoa, they still, by the way, still draw a paycheck. They're still on their jobs. But literally, they're not in the office. Or in some cases, they have an agreement where there's one agency, but I won't name but there's one agency where there's there were the there's Okay, here's another great thing. There are agencies of the federal government whose workforces are both civil servants, civil civil civil service protections, and the end unionized entirely paid for by the taxpayer, but they both have civil service protections, which by the way, are totally made up. There's no concept in the Constitution of like civil service protections. It's just like totally made up thing. And they're unionized. And then there's a particular agency that I know of where the union agreement the union negotiated the return of the office from COVID. And the agreement was you have to be in the office one day a month. Whoa, and actually what the pattern now is what they do is the employees come in on the last day of the month and the first day of the following month. So they only have to be there for two days for two months out of out of 60 days. That's crazy. As a consequence, many of them have actually left the area. Right? Because they get their government paycheck, right calibrated for living there. And then they go live someplace nice, you know, someplace nice, but you know, they go live in the Ozarks or something where it's right. cost of living is cheaper, and they have a bigger house. And you know, in theory, they're working from home, but like, you know, like, is it is it actually happening? So and this is why again, this is the does one of the things that the does they've they've already announced. The thing they've said is you can work from home just not for the federal government. Right? Yeah. And so when people are talking about like, is the does going to be able to do anything like it's just okay, there's 50% of the federal workforce. Right? And as you know, and as yes, as a taxpayer, how do you feel about that? And, you know, to your point on paying taxes, like if those people are in the office and they're dynamos of activity, and they're making the country better, right, fair enough, of course, but if they're kicking it at home, right, maybe not. Yeah, maybe not. And that's how much oversight has there been on whether or not they've been kicking it? Excellent question. Yeah. Now, it turns out there are ways there are actually there are ways to figure this out. So for example, for many, for many jobs where you have to log in, to be able to get access, like to email, you can actually in like, often you have VPNs to get into the corporate network, you can actually audit and you can see who's been working. And then there's a do you know about mouse wigglers? Yes. Yeah. Yes. Programs. No, no, actually physical. Oh, they're physical mouse. Physical mouse wigglers. And so it's a physical device that holds your mouse and then intermittently wiggles it. And a friend of mine who runs a big tech company, he just had like a nagging feeling in the back of his head that maybe all of his remote worker workers weren't pulling their weight. And so he actually wrote himself on a weekend algorithm to inspect all the mouse movements of employees for a week. And then and then he bought all 50 like mouse wigglers from China that you can buy. And he fingerprinted them all. And he found that he had a whole bunch of employees who were using mouse wigglers. Wow. Right. And so how many federal employees are using mouse wigglers? Right. So how crazy is that? That's how they can measure whether or not you're active. Yeah. Whether your mouse is moving. Yeah. Like what are they what are they seeing? Just just a pattern of movement of the mouse. That's it. Well, the mouse the mouse wiggler is moving in a way that you can fingerprint. So is this like you do you agree to a certain amount of disclosure of your personal information while you're working? Like how do you get access to mouse wiggles? Oh, so it's very common. So in corporate environments, it's very common that your your company issued computer has some kind of software on it that lets the company control the software and gives them and gives the company some level of visibility into what you're doing. And that doesn't mean that doesn't mean they're washing literally washing you. But it means that they have the ability to kind of reach in and be able to be able to see, you know, how much is the computer on? Wow. Is the mouse moving?
That's actually a reasonably common thing. I heard the most ridiculous argument against this. They're like, what are you going to do with all those employees that get fired? Like, what are you going to do with all those people who are stealing hubcaps? They're making a living stealing. What are you going to do if you make hubcaps stealing illegal? Like, what are you talking about? They're essentially stealing tax dollars. If they really are doing something that's totally useless, and we're wasting enormous amounts of money on this every year, the argument that what are you going to do if those people can't do that anymore is really crazy. Yeah. Well, the answer is they can do something productive. Yeah. And people are more than capable. You don't have to infantilize someone to say, like, this is the only thing they're capable of doing. Exactly. They've worked for the government for 20 years. This is all they can do. Yeah. And then, by the way, there's multiple knock-on, positive knock-on effects. If you can cut government spending, there's multiple knock-on effects. So one is, if you cut the spending, you can cut the taxes, and you can just simply, the private economy then just simply has more money, because it hasn't been taken. And so if there's less public spend, there will be more private spend, because the money reallocates. And so there might be just as much demand in the economy as just coming from people choosing to buy things instead of the government forcing it. So that's number one. Number two, you can bring down government debt, which means you can bring down government interest. And the government today, the federal government today pays more in interest than we pay for the Department of Defense. Right. But how much of that is salary? No, no. That's just interest on the debt. Right. That's just interest on the old debt. Okay. So 1.2 billion a year right now, I think, is the latest number, which is just interest on debt. It's not paying for any good or service. It's just interest on debt. Right. But again- What percentage of that is of the GDP? Well, so the total government spending is on the order of 7 trillion. Interest payments are like 1.2 trillion, something like that. 1.2 trillion a year. I think that's the current number. DOD is 800 billion a year. So 1.2 trillion. Just off the top. Yeah, just off the top. And again, nobody's benefiting from that. It's just interest payments. That's bananas. Right. I don't even, I don't know. It's 20, 30, 40 trillion. It's much larger than that. But still. It's enough. This is a lot of money. And the total accumulated debt is 35 trillion. And the total accumulated debt is 35 trillion and it adds another trillion of accumulated debt every 100 days. Yes. Oh my God, it hurts my head. There's a congressman actually, Thomas Massey. So he's the one guy in Washington who talks about this. And he's a liberal. He's one of the economists. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. He's a liberal. So he's the one guy in Washington who talks about this. And he's one of the only libertarians. And he's a, he's an MIT engineer and he actually designed himself a pocket lapel pin calculator of the government debt. And he wears it every day at Washington DC. So he walks around with this scroll? He walks with a little scrolling LED display. Oh my God. On his lapel. And it literally counts. It counts the debt. And it's accurate. It's pulling data from the US Treasury and it's actually an accurate count. And so it's like 34 trillion, 35 trillion, 36 trillion. Here's the kicker. At the current pace, at the compounding, it'll cross, the debt will cross a hundred trillion in the foreseeable future. So he's already working on the redesign because he needs a bigger device with a bigger screen to be able to display the bigger numbers. How much anxiety do you get standing around him looking at that? That's his goal, right? He wants, because otherwise the status quo in Washington is just let this happen. Oh. Right. And so, so anyway, so, so another way you benefit is reduction of interest. And then another way you benefit is reduction of interest rates. If you bring down the amount of debt in the economy, you bring down interest rates. And then everybody else who buys things, when you go to buy for a house, your mortgage is cheaper. Right? So everybody who buys, anybody who ever borrows money in the real economy then therefore is better off. Right. This is the argument against it being only good for wealthy people. Oh, it's good for everybody. Right. Yeah. It's good for anybody who ever gets car loan, home loan, small business loan. You want to bring down interest rates. But this fundamental discussion of it, like the argument, particularly from the left, is that all these tax cuts, deregulation, all this is going to do is make Trump supporters and Trump's people wealthier, and it's going to ruin the middle class and ruin the lower class. Everyone else is going to suffer. So just observationally, almost all the rich people in our society are, were for Kamala. Right. Really? Yeah. The Democratic Party, so the, so Democrat, Republican, it's a, it's what they call, it's a political scientist called top plus bottom versus middle is the configuration. So the Democratic Party is the top and the bottom versus the middle. So the top is what you might call the sort of upper middle class coastal elites. So it's everybody who went to the fancy schools. It's everybody with the fancy jobs. It's for sure me, I guess your grandfathered in. Yeah. Right. But it's like, it's like, you know, it's like, it's like fancy, it's like high net worth, high income people with primarily knowledge working jobs. Right. So, so some professor, reporter, programmer, right, database expert, author, lawyer, you know, accountant, banker, like all, all this sort of, you know, quote, elite jobs and all the elite degrees, by the way, who all went to the top schools and got like, you know, the, the, the elite degree. So, so that's the top. And then the bottom is what, what you call the clientele underclass. Right. So it's, and it's, it's the, it's, it's the called the rainbow coalition. Right. So it's all, it's the minority groups. Right. And so it's the assembly of, you know, low income African-Americans, low income Latinos, you know, dot, dot, dot, dot, dot, recent immigrants, recent immigrants and so forth.
And so that's the Democratic coalition that they explicitly program against and then Republicans in our era Republicans are in them It's it's the middle. It's the middle class lower middle class, you know It's it's all the people who don't have the fancy degrees and that are doing all the actual work That's basically making the country run, right? So it's it's everybody from the small business owner the restaurateur, you know, the truck drivers truck drivers farmers, you know All the way, you know garbage men and janitor Everybody who goes to work nine-to-five has a job probably probably either small business or a physical job, you know You know, it's sort of say labor like real labor like actual labor calluses on the hands, right? Right kinds of stuff so kind of the so-called real economy which is why I write the Republicans are concentrated in the center and the south because that's where all those things are and then Democrats are concentrated in New York and California and on the coast which is where all the symbolic, you know Creative intellectual jobs are and so so so and so so the weird thing that's happened is Progress liberalism progressivism started speaking for the working man, right like a hundred years ago It spoke for the working man. And now what's happened is there's been a complete reorientation where the working man Has separated out and then and then you saw that in this most recent election Where the unions the union leadership still for the most part endorsed Kamala but the rank-and-file Voted majority for Trump in a lot of cases and the the data point that I remember is the teamsters voted 70% for Trump What do you think the motivation of all these wealthy people to vote for Kamala Harris was because they feel great Because they're saving the world It's amazing to be in charge and control society and decide how everything works and decide who's good and who's bad and Like you're elite you get to be the elite you get to make the elite decisions And if you want to be in that group you have to got it you got it you got to do this and you feel good about yourself because you feel like what you're doing is on behalf of You feel like what you're doing is on behalf of your client of your clientele and it's reinforced by the echo chamber you live in Yeah, and it's just it's why the con if you read if you read the media on New York Times It's just it's it's either New York Times only has two articles anymore It's either how evil are Republicans or how, you know, innocent and helpless are, you know You know poor aggrieved minorities or you know identity groups Right, and so the oppositional force and then but we're the party of good with a capital G Because we're taking care of all these poor marginalized people. So it's a very compelling You feel great about yourself, right? It's just absolutely amazing And then by the way, it just so happens that the economy is wired up in a way where you're getting paid a ton of money Yeah, working very hard Great, and then you're completely isolated away from the lived experience of just normal people which is the state that I've found myself in where it would never even occur to you to talk to a garbageman or to a Somebody, you know running a restaurant or whatever because but it's just like you're not affected by the rising crime rates You live in a safe neighborhood, right? And you've got a you know, you're against the wall on the border, but you got a wall around your house, right? Right, and so you just you're in this bubble Uh-huh, and then you only ever talk to people who agree with you, right? And then the media is constantly reinforcing it and then you get ostracized if you disagree and that's that's the wedge like that's the way And it worked like look for a long time it were for 40 50 60 years. It worked as a way to gain and hold political power It's just it's just gotten wedged in kind of this corner where it it can no longer win And so therefore it it has to get reexamined so for you when you had this shift of thinking you Talk to the waiter and then the Hillary Clinton speech and they're like how long is it before you start? Publicly expressing these things and like how much of a reluctance is there? Well, so from 26 17 to 2020 I was just like trying to figure out what the hell was going on and then Kovat hit and then I was trying to figure out what the hell was going on with Kovat and you know our business You know went crazy our business caved in and had all kinds of crazy horrible things happening And we you know, we have all these companies we have hundreds of companies who are responsible for our startups And so we're working with them to try to keep them afloat and get the money and everything But really it was I mean really the big thing was the Biden administration just like flat-out tried to kill us Like they just came like straight at us and they came straight at our founders And so and they tried to kill crypto and they were they were on their way to trying to kill AI I mean they were there were horrible like there were Second was the motivation to kill AI because it says because did they want? They want control I mean they want control they want to control they want to control in the same way They can so they recognize the potential of it. I wanted to head it off of the path They want to control well, they want to put it in a headlock They don't necessarily want to stop it But they want to make sure that they control it in the same way that they controlled social media In the same way that they control the press. So how are they trying to do that sensor? I mean, so it's the it's the AI is think about it as the same dynamics that cause censorship to happen on social media We're also going to happen in AI and and so there's a couple steps So one is you just want a small number of companies that do AI because you want to be able to put them in a Headlock and control them. So you you basically want to give you basically want to have a government You want to bless a small set of large companies with a cartel? And set up a regulatory structure where those companies are intertwined with the government and then you want to prevent Startups from being able to enter that cartel. How would they do that? That's a threat to the control So it's constant called regulatory capture And so the way this is this is happening
It's happened many times for, you know, hundreds of years. This is like a very well-established kind of thing in economics and politics. So if it is, if suppose you're a big, suppose you're a big bank, suppose you're Jamie Dimon, you run JPMorgan Chase, like what's like the biggest possible threat of what you could possibly face. It's that there's some disruptive change that comes along that upends your entire business. You know, your Kodak, you know, your Kodak, you're making a ton of money on, on analog film and the digital cameras come along and you get destroyed. And for the, in your obituary, it's like, you're the idiot. Blockbuster video. Blockbuster video. Like that's the cautionary tale. Those are the ghost stories that those guys tell around the campfire at night. Right. They're just absolutely terrifying. Right. And like business schools teach you, like that's the one thing you do not want to do. And so there's two ways to try to deal with that. One is you could try to invent the future before it happens to you, but that's hard because you're running a big company and you know, these startups are out there doing all these crazy things and can you really do that? And it's hard and frisky and dangerous. The other thing you can do is you can go to the government and you can basically say, okay, we're going to, we would like to propose basically a trade, which is we would like the government to put up a wall of regulation, right? We would like the government to put in place rules, right? That are potentially thousands of pages long. Right. And in fact, the more, the better, right? We want a very, very, very high bar for regulation for what's required to be in this business because I'm a big company. I can afford 10,000 lawyers and compliance people, right? I voluntarily put myself under basically the government thumb. But in return, the government has erected this wall of regulations such that the next startup comes along and just literally the next company comes along and just literally can't function. And by the way, this is literally what happened in banking. So pre 2008, pre the financial crisis, there were many different banks in the country, big, big, medium, small, and lots of new bank startups every year that would, people would just start banks, entrepreneurial banks of many different kinds. After the financial crisis, we had this problem called the too big to fail banks, right? The banks were too big. And so there was this legislation called Dodd-Frank, which was regulatory reform for banking, which was going to fix the too big to fail banking problem. They implemented that in 2011. I call that the big bank protection act of 2011. It was marketed as it was going to solve the problem of the too big to fail banks. What it actually did was it made them much larger. So those banks are, those banks, those too big to fail banks, the same ones we bailed out are now much larger than they were before. The banking industry has concentrated into those banks. All the midsize banks are being shaken out and you know, they're periodically, they'll go under like our bank in Silicon Valley is called Silicon Valley Bank, right? And you know, it went under. And this has been happening all across the economy. And then since Dodd-Frank, the number of new banks created in the United States has dropped to zero. Whoa. And so the banking system is being centralized basically into 10 big banks. They actually have a term, they have a great term called G-SIB, globally significant something, something bank. And so there's like 10 G-SIBs. And then basically what's going to happen is those are going to consolidate basically into the three big banks. And if you get debanked by one of the big three- You're done. You're absolutely done. Oh my God. But think about it from the other side. If you're the treasury secretary and you want your political enemy debanked, it's just a phone call, right? Which is what has been happening, which was happening under the prior regime. Wow. Right? And again, like at that- Zero. Zero new banks. Yeah. Zero. Literally, it was like cardiac arrest. It was like, that's it for new bank charters. And we've had companies that have tried to start new banks and it's essentially impossible because you have to comply with the wall of regulation. You need to go hire your 10,000 compliance people and your lawyers, but you can't afford to do that because you're not big enough yet. So you can't function. You can't exist. Wow. It's ruled out. It's by definition, it's ruled out. You can't do it. It's not financially viable. Wow. Right. So that happened in banking. That's what they've been doing to social media. It's been the same. And by the way, this has happened in many other industries. By the way, this happened in the food industry has greatly consolidated. That's a lot of what's happened in that industry as well. And it's the intertwining of government and the company, right? Because at that point it's like, okay, is this a private company? Yes. Like it's still a private company. It has a stock price. It has a CEO. Does the CEO have to do everything that the relevant cabinet secretary tells them to do? Yes, he does. Why does he have to do that? Because if not, it's going to be investigations and subpoenas and prosecutions and frontological examinations for the rest of his life. Wow. Everything. So it's essentially what we accuse the CCP of doing in China. So if you combine banking and social media and now AI, you have basically privatized social credit score, right? Is where you end up with this, right? And this goes back to the truck or strike thing. You don't have to threaten to take away somebody's kids. You just like, you threaten to take away their insurance. You don't threaten to take away their insurance. It's not government insurance that's being taken away. The same thing has happened in the insurance industry. It's consolidated down to a small handful of companies. They're super regulated. If the government doesn't want you to have insurance, you're not going to have insurance. And there's no constitutional right to insurance. Right. So there's no appeal process. We're back to the debanking thing. And so that happened in banking. That's been happening in internet.
tech, social media generally. It's been happening in many other sectors. And then it's happening specifically in AI. And what you have in AI is you have a set of CEOs of some of the big AI companies that want this to happen. Because again, their big threat is that we're gonna fund a startup that's gonna eat their lunch, right? It's gonna really screw them up. And so they're like, look, if we could just take the position we have and lock it in with government protection, the trade is we'll do whatever the government wants. And if you assume the government is controlled by, you know, people who want to censor and punish and cancel their political opponents, that's gonna come right along with it. And so that's why when these AI systems come out, like nine times out of 10, they're tremendously politically biased. You can do this today. You just go on, you go on any of these systems today and you just like ask, you just start asking like really basic questions. Gemini is the best example of that, right? When they had the multiracial Nazis. The black Nazis. Yeah. Once again, we're back to the Nazis. Yes, so it turns according to Gemini, Hitler had an excellent DEI policy. Yeah. Now, in reality, he did not. And it's important to understand that in reality, he did not. But yeah, Gemini happily threw up black Nazis because they programmed it to be biased. They programmed it in a political direction. There's this guy, David Rosato, who's been doing these analyses on the social media side, where he shows the incidence rates of the rise of like all of the woke like language, like in the media. And there are similar studies that have come out for the AI where there's studies that have been done that basically show the political orientation of the LMs. Because you can ask them questions and they'll tell you. And they're just like nine out of 10 of them are like tremendously biased. And then there's a handful that aren't. And then there's tremendous pressure. This is one of the threats from the government is, is the government basically gonna force our startups to come into compliance, not just with their trade rules, but also with all of their, essentially a censorship regime on AI that's exactly like the censorship regime that we had on social media. Wow, that's terrifying. Yeah, exactly. And yes, and this is my belief and what I've been trying to tell people in Washington, which is if you thought social media censorship was bad, this has the potential to be a thousand times worse. And the reason is social media is important, but at the end of the day, it's quote just people talking to each other. AI is gonna be the control layer on everything, right? So AI is gonna be the control layer on how your kids learn at school. It's gonna be the control layer on who gets loans. It's gonna be the control layer on, does your house open when you come to the front door? It's gonna be the control layer on everything, right? And so if that gets wired into the political system, the way that the banks did and the way that social media did, like we are in for a very bad future. And that's a big thing that we've been trying to prevent is to keep that from happening. And the Biden administration was explicitly on that path. Like they were very clearly going for that. And it was just like crystal clear that's where it was headed. And do you feel like with a second administration, they'd be even more emboldened to act in that direction? Yes, 100%. Another Biden administration for sure. And then there was an open question on Kamala and the open question there was just, as you know, she wouldn't declare if her issues positions were the same as Biden's or if they were different. And so you could imagine a Kamala administration that had a very different approach, but she refused to clarify any of her positions. And so we had to assume that they would be the same as Biden's, which I think is the default case. Now is this a closeted sort of a perspective in Silicon Valley? Do people hide these thoughts that this administration would be bad for business? I mean, much less now than- I mean, look, Elon really broke a lot of, Elon did two things that really opened a lot of this up. One is he bought Twitter, which really gave us a place to talk about this stuff, all of us. But then also he himself, of course, started to actually express himself. And so he gave a lot of the rest of us permission structure to be able to say these things. And then look, it's like a cascade where people are like, okay, apparently you can now talk about things. Okay, I have some things to say. Well, and then look, also just, they went too far, they tightened the screws. I mean, they really came at us hard. And so, you know, and the harder they come at us, like we didn't predict. When Biden won, like we didn't think it would have negative effects on our business. We thought, yeah, probably taxes will go up, but like, we'll just keep doing business. But then they did all these things, right? And it took a couple of years to figure out that this was not like a temporary thing, like this was like a concerted campaign and that they were really coming for us. What agency specifically is involved in doing that? Oh, I mean, it's the alphabet soup, but like SEC, SEC tried to kill crypto very specifically. FTC, you know, was thoroughly weaponized. There's something called the CFTC, which is the other part of the crypto puzzle, commodities, futures. Crypto, there's crypto that's a security. There's some forms of crypto that are security and the SEC regulates. There's other kinds of crypto that are a commodity that the CFTC regulates. The CFPB, I mentioned earlier, so the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau, right, decided that they were also gonna regulate AI, which they just volunteered for. And then, you know, the FAA, the FAA killed the drone industry years ago. The reason why we don't have, the reason why the Chinese are winning in the drone wars is because the FAA basically made drones illegal in the US.
years ago, so like the FAA has been a big problem, you know, the, what is it, the F, also the FAA. When you say made drones illegal, but you can still buy drones, like what, what have they done? So, legally, you cannot fly a drone in the U.S. that is beyond line of sight if you don't have a pilot's license. Wow. Which means if you're a U.S. drone manufacturer, you have to build a system that enforces that regulation. So, you have to handicap your ability. Yes. So, either the, either the U.S. drone needs to either not fly beyond line of sight, which is not very useful, right? Right. Or it needs to somehow validate. We only have customers that have pilot, have pilot's licenses. China there's no such restriction. Right. And the Chinese, we have, because we run a more open economy, the Chinese drones you can just buy in the U.S. and use however you want. Technically, as the user of the drone, you're out of compliance with the law, but they ignore that part. They just punish the American drone makers. Wow. And that's why, that's why Chinese own the drone market, and that's why 90% of the drones used by the U.S. military and by U.S. police are Chinese-made drones, which, again- That sounds like a terrible security risk. Is a very bad idea, because every Chinese drone is both a potential surveillance platform and a potential weapon. Oh, criminy. Yes. Well, I've seen the advancements in Chinese drones in particular, the choreographed dances that they do in the sky, where they had, did you see the dragon one? Yeah. Yeah, exactly. The Chinese dragon drone display, it's like one of the largest ones they ever did. It's unbelievable how much more advanced they are. Yeah. And I will tell you, the Biden administration had zero interest in addressing this, or worse than zero. Like just, I would say, absolute contempt for the idea of a U.S. drone industry. So let's watch this thing, so you can go full screen on that. Like this is just a grid in the sky, look at this. They're flying up together. They did one that was at night, Jamie, because they were all lit up. It's on this video, it's just full. Oh, okay. I can skip ahead if you want. So imagine those with guns. Jesus Christ. Coming at you, right? Well, we get to see some of that in Ukraine. Yeah. 100%. Absolutely. Yeah. We've seen those suicide drones. Like, look at this. That dragon in the sky is drones that are all lit up. I mean, that is unbelievable. Yeah. It even has a puff of fire coming out of its mouth. That's incredible. If they send that at a football stadium during a game with grenades on those drones. Oh my God. It's carnage. Dude, don't even put that out there. Don't put that voodoo on me, Ricky Bobby. Sorry. Look at that heart in the sky with a heartbeat. Correct. This is insane. Correct. Yes. It's so incredible. Yes. They had a little one like that that played over the M&M concert when I was at COTA at the Circuits of the Americas here. They had this giant M&M concert, there was like 100,000 people there, and then afterwards they had drones in the sky that did little dances. Chinese drones. I bet. I bet they were. They were. They weren't like this though. It wasn't at that level. That's unbelievable. Enjoy the show while you can. That's crazy that that's a Chinese thing only. Yeah. Look, DOD runs on these. Soldiers in the field, it's very common soldiers, just soldiers, normal ground soldiers in the field carry drones in their backpacks because they want to be able to see what's around the building or up on the roof. Yeah. And these are Chinese-made drones. Chinese drones. And every single one of them can be taken over by China and used for whatever they want. Oh my God. Anytime they want. Is the Trump administration on this? They're very ... I don't know what they'll do. It's somewhere in the priority order of the things that they're dealing with, but yes, they are well aware of this. And it's the kind of thing I would hope that would get some attention. Yeah. Yeah. Well, this brings us back to the UAP thing. Because if that's what we're seeing, we're seeing super sophisticated Chinese drones that operate on some novel propulsion system. That's not good. Yeah. And that could be because they put ridiculous regulations on drone manufacturers in America. Yeah. That's right. And they got way ahead of us. Yeah. These are bad. These are bad. These are bad paths. It's also, you're just opening my eyes to this. I always had this rose-colored glasses view of our society versus the Chinese society. Our society is more open. So people can innovate and come up with new startups and all these crazy ideas. Because there's so much freedom in America, they don't have to deal with the government being involved in every business. Silly me. Well- Silly me. I was wrong. There's an argument I make geopolitically in DC, which is, if you imagine that the 21st century is going to be, let's say, a contest between the US and China, the same way that in the 20th century it was the US versus the Soviet Union, contest, competition, Cold War, maybe hot war. Yeah. That's the basic fundamental geopolitical puzzle of the 21st century. Then you want to think very clearly about the strengths and weaknesses of both yourselves and about the other side. And then as you think about how to beat the other guy, is the answer to become more like them or more like yourself? Jane Waters made that argument when it comes to social digital scores and cryptocurrency and a centralized digital currency. She was talking about that. In order to compete with China, we have to come up with a centralized digital currency. Which in my view is exactly the wrong thing.
I was like, that's a terrible idea. It's exactly the wrong thing. You gotta be like China to compete with China? It's exactly the wrong thing. It's exactly the wrong thing. You don't want that. Because the China system has its problems. They terrorize their own population directly. They do impose the social credits course stuff. They do all this stuff. And then, by the way, here's something we have going for us, which is the Chinese system has turned on capitalism. Xi Jinping is not a capitalist, and there is a broad-based crackdown on private business in China. A friend of mine, one of the leading investors in China, he said every single Chinese tech founder has either left China or wants to leave China. And they're all trying to get their money out, and they're all trying to get their families out because it's now too dangerous to run a tech company in China because the government might just snatch you, like literally, physically snatch you at any point, and you may or may not come back. And then every Chinese CEO has a political officer of the Chinese Communist Party sitting down the hall who can come in and override your decisions anytime he wants to, and by the way, and drag you into training. This is a great thing. You're the CEO of a company with 50 billion in revenue and 100,000 employees, and this guy from the CCP comes in and pulls you, and you sit in the conference room down the hall for seven hours getting grilled on how well you understand Marx. That actually happens. It's political officers. And that's the kind of thing that happened in the Soviet Union, and that's the kind of thing that happens in China. So you'd rather be a CEO in the US than in China, for sure, as long as the US system actually stays open, where you can actually get all the benefits of all the power of all these incredibly smart people building companies and building products. And that's why this administration freaked us out so much, is because it felt like they were trying to become way more like China. See, I was not nearly as aware as I should have been about all these things that you're saying. I didn't know this. I did know about the banks, and I certainly didn't know that they were cracking down on AI the same way they crack down on social media. The AI thing was very alarming. We had meetings this spring that were the most alarming meetings I've ever been in, where they were taking us through their plans, and it was- What kind of... Can you talk about it? Full government control, this sort of thing. There will be a small number of large companies that will be completely regulated and controlled by the government. They told us, they just said, don't even start startups, don't even bother. There's just no way. There's no way that they can succeed. There's no way that we're going to permit that to happen. Wow. Yeah, they just said, this is already over. It's going to be two or three companies, and we're going to control them, and that's that. This is already finished. Oh my God. Now, when you leave a meeting like that, what do you do? You go endorse Donald Trump. Oh my God. And again, I'll just tell you, because I'm going to get a lot of... The flak I'm going to get for this is, he's just a crazy, whatever, right-winger, but I was a Democrat. I was a Democrat. I supported Bill Clinton in 92. I supported Clinton in 96. I supported Gore, who I knew very well, in 2000. I knew John Kerry. I supported him in 04. I supported Obama. I supported Hillary in 16. I was a Democrat in good standing. Are you completely out in the cocktail circuit now? Are you allowed to hang out with people? This is actually true. There's now two kinds of dinner parties in Silicon Valley. They fractured cleanly in half. There's the ones where every person there believes every single thing that was in the New York Times that day, which, by the way, is often very different than whatever was in the New York Times six months ago, but everybody has fully updated their views for that day, and that's what they talk about at the dinner party, and I am no longer invited to those, nor do I want to go to them, and then there's the other kind, which is David Sachs and all these guys and all these people and just this growing universe. It's a microcosm of what's happening more broadly in the culture, which is like, hey, let's actually get together and talk about things and have fun. Right, but it's so much more comforting when it's you guys and not the MyPillow guy. You know what I mean? No disrespect, Mike, to the MyPillow guy, but you know what I'm saying? I want people that are smarter than me to be saying these things. That's what helps. It helps when you say, well, this person actually knows what they're talking about. They're very well informed, and they understand the repercussions. They understand what's been coming their way, and there's people like yourself that can speak about ... The plans that you're laying out, what they were trying to do with AI, is fucking terrifying. That should terrify everybody, where you have bureaucrats who are now in control of potentially the biggest agent of change in the history of the human race, potentially, and you're going to let what? The people that can't even balance the budget? People that don't know what the fuck is going on? That sounds insane. Yep. Yep. And look, my hope, I think, under Clinton and Gore, I think that they dealt with this very different. I mean, look, they dealt with the internet very differently than the current cropper are dealing with these technologies. Well, it was very different. It was very different, but also, they were much more ... Clinton and Gore, in particular, were much more understanding that you could ... So, there used to be this thing I called The Deal, with a capital D, and The Deal was, you could be, and this is what I was, you could be a tech founder, you could start a private company, you could create a tech product. Everybody loved you. It was great. Glowing press coverage, the whole thing. You take the company public. It employs a lot of people. It creates a lot of jobs. You make a lot of money. At some point, you cash out, and then you donate all the money to charity, and everybody thinks you're a hero.
Right, it's just great. Right. And this is how it ran for a very long time. And this was the deal. This was, you know, the deal, this was Clinton and Gore with 100% support of that. And they were 100% pro capitalism in this way and 100% pro tech. And they actually did a lot to foster this kind of environment. And basically, what happened is the last 15 years or so Democrats culminating in this administration, basically broke every part of that deal. For people in my world, like every single part of that was shattered, right, where just like technology became presumptively evil. Right. And like, you know, if you're a business person, you were presumptively a bad person, and then technology was presumptively had bad effects and dot dot dot, and then they were going to regulate you and try to kill you and quash you. And then the kicker was philanthropy became evil. And this is a real culture change in the last five years that I hope will reverse now, which is philanthropy now is a dirty word on the left, because it's the private person choosing to give away the money as opposed to the government choosing a way to give the money. So I'll give you the ultimate case that here's where I radicalized on this topic. So you'll recall some years back, Mark Zuckerberg and his wife, Priscilla, you know, they have a ton of money in Facebook stock, they created a nonprofit entity called Chan Zuckerberg initiative, which which the original mission was to literally cure all disease. And this could be like, you know, $200 billion going to cure all disease, right? So like a big deal. They said they committed to donate 99% of their assets to this to this new foundation. They got brutally attacked from the left and the attack was they're only doing it to save money on taxes. Now, basic mathematics, you don't give away 99% of your money to save money on taxes, right? But it was a vicious attack. It was like a very, very aggressive attack. And the fundamental reason for the attack was how dare they treat that money like it's their own? How dare they decide where it goes? Instead, tax rates for billionaires should go to 90 something percent, the government should take the money and the government should allocate it. And that would be the morally proper and correct thing to do. What do you think is the root of that kind of thinking? utopian? This is a utopian collectivism. You know, it's the it's socialism. That was socialism. Yeah, it's the core idea of socialism. Like the core idea is this, this is sort of, there's a radical egalitarianism, everybody should be exactly the same, all outcomes should be exactly the same. Everything should be completely fair. And some route of it has to be an envy. Of course, yeah. resentment. Yes. Nietzsche had this great term called resentment. And it's like turbocharged resentment. And so the way he described his resentment is envy, resentment and bitterness. That is so intense that it causes an inversion of values. And the things that used to be good become bad. And the things that used to be bad become good. Right. And that's how philanthropy becomes bad for philanthropy becomes bad, because it should be the state operating on behalf of the people as a whole who are handing out the money, not the individual. I was not aware of that blowback. I would have loved to read some of those comments. I would like to go to their page and see what else they comment. I'll give you another example. Here's another radicalizing moment. So my friend Sheryl Sandberg, who I worked with very closely for a long time at Facebook, you know, and by the way, Democrat, you know, liberal, and by the way, endorsed Kamala, like very much not on the same page as me on these things. She actually worked in the Clinton administration, you know, died in the world Democrats. She wrote this book called lean in about 12 years ago. It's this sort of feminist manifesto. And it basically lean in, lean in, lean in. And the thesis of lean in was that women in their lives and careers could quote, unquote, lean in. She said what she observed in a lot of meetings was the men were leaning into the table and sitting like in front and then the women were like leaning back and waiting to be called on. She said that women should lean in, it became a metaphor for her for women should like lean in on their careers. They should like aggressively advocate for themselves to get like raises and promotions like men do like men do. They should basically women should basically become more aggressive in the workplace and then therefore, you know, perform better. And so it was like, it was a manifesto to women basically saying be more confident, be more assertive, be more aggressive, be more successful. And I read the draft of the book when she was writing it. And I said, well, you know, you realize you've written a right wing manifesto. Right. And she looks at me like I've lost my mind, right? Because she's a lifelong lifelong lefty. She's like, what do you mean? And I'm like, you this book is a statement that women have agency. Right? This book is a statement that the things that women choose to do will lead to better results. But that's what people believe on the right on the left of people believe is that women are only always and ever victims. Wow. And if a woman doesn't succeed in a career, it's because she's being discriminated against. And so I said, I said, I predicted when this book comes out, right wingers are going to think it's great. And you're going to get it. Like the left is going to come at you because you're violating the fundamental principle of the left, which is anybody who does less well as a victim, which in that case is exactly what happened. By the way, the reviews were all by women and they tore into her, like in every major publication, they just like completely ripped her. How dare this rich entitled woman be telling us, you know, these would be telling women that they're not victims and that they're, you know, that they have all this agency because this is denial of sexism, right? It's denial of oppression. Wow. Cause imagine if a man wrote a book like that for men, right? That was patriarchy, right? That's yeah. That'd be wow. But I mean, but men wouldn't attack it. Oh, right. Exactly. Right. It would be a guidebook. Yeah. This is how you kick ass and get ahead. Yeah. We call it self-help lean in bro.
Lean in Lean in bro, exactly, right? Wow, that's crazy. It's a good attack for that. So again, it's this inversion. It's resentment It's the inversion which is like advocating on your own behalf and choosing to do things that make you what was her reaction to that Well, I would say she was I don't want to speak for her, but she was not Not pleased. I mean also was she shocked that you're correct. Did you have a follow-up conversation with her? What did she talk about a lot like goddammit mark? How'd you see that one coming? So she was in the but the answer is she was her her world view of how these things worked was from a different It was from the Clinton Gore era right in which you could win which you could say they talk like that You could talk like yes, and by the time the book came out It was already into the second Obama term heading it right and it was and then the what will the book stuff started and then? At that point you could no longer say things like that Wow And everything got classified through this very hard-edged right us versus them right oppressor versus oppressed boy and so it's such a It's such a contrast to what we hoped would happen when Obama would be president. That's right. My thought was okay Look, there's still some racism But clearly if you're the baddest motherfucker, you can get ahead like you can win the country will vote for you That's not what happened. No, and you can win again. You would twice you win twice and be like I've always said up until I've lost a lot of respect for him from some of the things that he said during this Election cycle because I think they got desperate and they just resorted to actual lies And I thought this is crazy to see him lying especially the very fine people hoax and we played the video back and forth of what Obama said he said and what he actually said and it's pretty shocking because he's very explicit You know, he's saying not white nationalists not neo-nazis. They should be condemned. He says that very clearly that's not I'm talking about talking about people who are protesting the taking down of the statue right and When you see a guy like Obama do that It's such a bummer because he was the guy for me. That was like our best spokesman He was like here's a guy that came from a single family a single parent household It wasn't some rich entitled kid who was given everything in life. He's this brilliant speaker He he's like he's handsome. He represents like what we're hoping for We're hoping for a colorblind society just treats people on the merit of who they are and anyone can achieve and look here He made it and then all sudden identity politics goes through the fucking roof and Victim mentality becomes a thing that people choose to side with and it it just gets real weird for a long time Yeah, that's right That's right. And like I said, I hope they can find their way back. So but this lady still on team Kamala. Oh, yeah She got a few lessons out of that but not all of them Well, no, this is if you're you know, if you've been a lifelong Democrat If you've been a lifelong Democrat and if that's you know, if that is in this quarter a lot of people's value systems Then it's it's a real challenge, you know, oh, yeah, it's my parents when your movement Goes in directions. Well, yeah, and there's you know, right and you can shoot you can choose to follow You can choose to follow into the you know The craziest version of it or you can choose to say, you know what like I'm still not gonna switch sides But at least I'm gonna advocate right for my team to come back. Yeah, this is Richie Torres No, this guy is a congressman in in in Queens. I think or the Bronx He's actually it actually started out everybody thought he was gonna be a far leftie because he's gay he's black he's Latino He was like us He was like at least associated with the squad early on and he's like one of the guys in the Democratic Party who has now Stood up and he's been doing this in public for the last two weeks saying Clearly we have to get back to sense like we have to get back to common sense. We have to get back to moderation Yeah, we have to we have to have law enforcement. We have to have you know, we can't have crime in the streets We have to have a border You know We have to we have to get we the Democrats have to get back to moderation and sense and so he is hoping to lead The party that's great that I think he's we support him and I think he's like a really I think he's a very impressive guy So there are people like and he's young and very energetic and you know, I think he has a very bright future But that's the kind of person who could lead the party Well, the big Nietzschean shift was when Dick Cheney endorsed Kamala and everybody cheered If there's not a better example than that, please tell me what it is because that one was fucking nuts Like Dick Cheney was always the hard right like during the Bush administration All the lefties looked at him like that was Satan. That's right. He was the profiteer. That's right He was the the manipulator. He was the guy pulling the strings Yeah, he was the CEO of Hal Burton that came the whole thing was so crazy and to see Oh Dick Cheney Just endorsed Kamala and everybody's like yay. Look Dick Cheney's on our side like what the fuck are you guys talking about? This is this is the best shift of it, right? Yeah, that's right. That's right That's right All of us are at all of a sudden we're on the all of a sudden we were all neocons all of a sudden as you said All of a sudden we're pro-war It's like wait, wait, you know cuz like as you know, like the number, you know, yeah, the Democrats used to be the anti-war party Yes, they were the anti-war party for a very long time. Yes. Yes Yeah Except back when they were trying to keep slavery in act Part of the problem that was a different don't realize that
that was a different era. But yeah, you know, what coming out of Vietnam, they were definitely the antiwar party for like, you know, 30. Isn't that a shift as well? Yeah. But the shift of the Republicans from back in the day, being Abraham Lincoln, and that trying to get rid of slavery, and the Democrats fighting to keep it like this, these weird ideological swings, they happen. And, you know, we're still attached to the idea of being a democrat is like being a Clinton Democrat. We're in this weird sort of denial of what the ideology actually stands for versus how we think of ourselves. When we say I'm a democrat, I'm a good person. You know, I support civil rights, women's rights, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, down the line, I'm a democrat. And if you go against that, well, now you're against all these things that you know, to be inherently important for society. Yeah, that's right. They gotcha. Yeah, that's right. They got you. They roped you into some crazy thing. We're supporting war. And then there is the big faction, right? There's the big free Palestine versus support Israel. Yeah, because the left always supported Israel. 100%. And then all of a sudden, there's this free Palestine movement, which divides the left even further. Yeah. There's this book, there's a book written some years back by this guy, Norman Podhoretz, and that's good. So why are Jews liberal? Right? And he was a right wing, he was right wing Jew, a very important Jewish thinker, American Jewish thinker of like, in the 60s, 70s, 80s. And he's like, he basically was like, basically, he had this thesis that like these Jewish liberal voters in the US, like basically are voting against ultimately, they're voting for the wrong team. Because what they don't understand, basically, is that this is sort of a path number one to anti semitism, which is what's happened. But number two, the basically, you're never going to have long term support for Israel from the left, because Israel, the basic concept of Israel violates that, you know, the idea that Israel is like literally a religious ethnostate. Right. And that's like inherently a right wing idea, not a left wing, right? Like the left doesn't have room for the military superpower in the military, right, and is able to write is able to and it's run by a former special forces operator. Very, yes, very, very capable. Yes, very capable soldier. And he's a fucking assassin. Exactly. And so, you know, he argued, I don't know, it's like, whatever, 20 years ago, he's like, this is headed in the wrong direction. And but you know, the argument was ignored at the time. And then, you know, at least a lot of my Jewish friends after October 7, you know, they were completely horrified, you know, to find out, for example, the DEI was actually anti Jewish, right, which is what everybody learned with the scandals at the universities, right? And it's like, you know, there's two ways of looking at that one is, oh, my God, the DEI is anti Jewish. Therefore, we need to add Jews to the DEI scorecard, right? Well, when we saw the heads of Harvard, and was it MIT? Was it Yale? No, it was Harvard, MIT in Columbia. Yeah, that was, yeah, that's right. That was just so in everyone's face. And so bananas. Well, and then we saw that, right. And then we saw is that this the same sort of radicalized left had actually slid into not just anti Semitism, and not just anti Israel, but also pro, I mean, ultimately, pro terrorist pro Hamas. Yeah, you know, the new acronym, or LGBT H. No, right. But there's a bunch of other stuff in there. Now. There's a queue, there's two spirit. No, but you gotta get H in there now for Hamas. Oh, boy. Really? Of course, of course, of course. And so so like, yeah, I bring it, I bring it up, just as an not to take a position, just as an example of it's the kind of realignment. Yeah, a lot of Jewish Americans now are having to kind of rethink fundamental questions about political structure and alliances and who they should be part of and who they shouldn't be part of. So I think to your point, I think like the whole country is going through, I think we're going through the first, like, profound political realignment, probably since the 1960s. Yeah, which is which is when everything shifted between Johnson and Nixon. In the south. I think we're going through like the most profound version of that right now. And I think it's it's something like the multi ethnic working class coalition, you know, that came together around Trump, you know, basically, again, against this sort of super exaggerated elite plus underclass, you know, kind of structure that the Democrats have built for themselves. And it just it just turns out there's just a lot more people in the middle. And so I think but but by the way, including a lot of a lot of black people, a lot of black people, you know, black vote for Trump is way up Hispanic vote for Trump is way up right vote for Trump is way up way up gay vote is like all of yes, all of the identity groups that Democrats relied on all these years are union vote is for Trump. I'm sure you've seen the map, the electoral map of California. 2024 and 2020. Yes. In contrast, it's a crazy red wave that's going through across the whole the most of the state is red now. Those of us on the coast are going to get pushed into the ocean. Yes. Well, I think, you know, maybe the other way we were talking about the hopeful way that the Democrats will wake up. Yeah. And come up with a more reasonable I mean, there's obviously clear cultural pushback on all these crazier crazier issues. And I mean, like, the giant pushback from women about biological men competing against women. I mean, this is a giant one where women are like, listen, we create a title nine for a reason. Like we want women's sports to be for women, you can't have them for mentally ill men that think that they can be able to just decide they're a woman and compete against women, which is what it is in a lot of places, you don't even have to get tested. There's not like some sort of
hormone protocol. It's just like, it's just what your identity is, which is just nuts. And that's one of the things that I think a lot of people on the left are having a really hard time justifying. Yeah, right. Because how can you how can you deny a victim group? Right, right. You can't I mean, in the in the full version of that idea, and the extreme version ideology, you cannot deny any, you cannot deny a victim claim. What also comes with this weird caveat where you have to deny the existence of perverts, because a pervert, all they have to do is say, I identify as a woman throw on a wig, and now you can go hang around the women's room, and no one could say anything. Well, you've you've emboldened empowered one of the worst groups in society that we've always protected women from. And you have to pretend they don't exist. If you just want to base it solely on identity, especially like a self described identity, you just decide, and then that's it. And, you know, I mean, there's states that have that now with prisoners, that all prisoner has to do is identify with being a woman, and you are now housed in women's prisons. California is 47 of them, when the last time I looked at it, and there's hundreds that are waiting on like a waiting list to try to get in. So you have women who, you know, especially if you're someone who's dealing with, if you've ever been raped or sexually abused. And now you have to share space with a man who might be a fucking pervert. And some of these men even have some crimes that are along those lines that they're in jail for. It's crazy. I mean, Canada is the worst at it. There's a bunch of different examples of these type of people getting in female prisons, and it's just it's insanity. And I think the left rejects that too, for the most part, there's the sensible version of the left that is like, hey, yeah, I'm pro gay rights. Yeah, I'm pro women's rights. I'm pro civil rights. I'm pro choice. I'm pro this. I'm anti warm up. But also, you can't let psychos just put on a fucking dress and hang out in women's rooms just because we want to be kind. Like, that's nuts. So there has to be some and then there's legitimate trans women. So like, how do you make the distinct? Well, clearly, we have to have a fucking conversation. And if you don't allow that conversation to take place, like, if you go to blue sky, and you type in there are only two genders, you're banned. You're right there. People have done it. There's a bunch of people have done it. It's fun. Yeah, it's fun. They have like, they've created a little sock puppet account. They say some shit that should have been a reasonable thing to say just 20 years ago. Yeah. Yeah. Well, you make me hopeful, Mark. Good. You do? You do? Because you lay things out in like a really well thought out way that is not hyperbolic, and you're making a lot of sense. So I'm glad we talked. I feel better. Good. Fantastic. I think the world does, too. I really do. I mean, I've talked to a lot of people, even people that are Democrats, they said, I feel better that Trump won. Every day, it feels better. It's just like, you know, it feels like just things are opening up. It's the Obama campaign. It's hope and change. Yeah, hope and change. It's hope you change. This is kind of actually hope and change. Yeah, this is actually it. It feels like oxygen return. Yes. Yeah. Well, thank you very much, Mark. I really appreciate you. Tell everybody, your Substack, how to find you on social media. Oh, I'm on X under Pmarkay. I'm on Substack. Google me. All right. Ask Perplexity. All right. Ask ChatGPT, and it will deny that. No, it will happily tell you that I exist, at least last time I checked. What about Wikipedia? Yeah, we don't know. We don't know if Catherine is still running it. Always a pleasure, Mark. Thank you very much. Appreciate you. All right. Bye, everybody. Bye.