With the failure of the last kings to build a stepped pyramid to match Djoser's, Snefru began to wonder if he could build something even better, a pyramid that conformed to a perfect geometrical shape. He had a vision of a pyramid with polished, smooth sides, unlike anything the world had seen before. His first attempt to accomplish this would be at the Pyramid of Meydoum. There is some debate about whether the Meydoum pyramid was built by Snefru or by his predecessor Huni, but we can assume they wouldn't compete for the honor as it stands as one of the most impressive failed pyramids in history. The Meydoum pyramid was built in several stages. First, it was a stepped pyramid of similar design to Djoser's, and then this interior structure was encased in a steep shell of white limestone, creating a high and narrow point. The effect would have been beautiful, that is, until one day as the pyramid neared completion, when the entire weight of the stone facing began to collapse in all directions. We can only imagine the noise and calamity that must have accompanied this, the workers leaping clear of the wreckage, the overseers watching aghast as an avalanche of painstakingly cut stone poured off the side of the pyramid. The moment this happened, Snefru ordered the construction to be halted. Workmen inside the interior chambers simply put down their tools and left. Today, the burial chamber inside the pyramid is still unfinished, with raw, uncarved walls and wooden supports still in place which were usually removed after construction. Snefru must have been devastated, but he wasn't discouraged. Soon, he tried again with a pyramid at the site of Dahshur, just to the south of the royal necropolis of Saqqara. This pyramid was intended to be tall, and its sides were even steeper than the first. His workmen began to construct it with a sharp 53-degree slope to its sides, and this time Sneferu must have hoped that he would get the pyramid he dreamed of. But this would not turn out to be the case. This second pyramid was built on ground that was only soft sand and shale. As the pyramid took shape and its weight climbed into the millions of tons, they found that the stone was sinking into the earth and causing cracks to appear in the structure. We can only imagine how it felt to be the architect who had to bring this bad news to the king, the son of Ra, the living embodiment of the god Horus. The workmen tried everything they could, from adding new supporting blocks to the base, to propping up subsiding sections with huge beams of cedar wood, but it was hopeless. It became clear that if they continued the pyramid as planned, it would likely collapse, just as the first one had. The pharaoh Sneferu seems to have listened to reason. He consented to allow his workmen to hurriedly finish the pyramid with a reduced angle of only 43 degrees, and a final height reduced by 25 meters. This means that today, the pyramid has a peculiar snub-nosed appearance that has given it the name the Bent Pyramid. It's clear that Sneferu still wasn't satisfied. He now ordered the construction of a final pyramid one kilometer to the north, combining everything his craftsmen had learned from the first two. This one was now built with a 43-degree incline from the beginning, more evenly distributing the weight on the earth, and finally, Sneferu got the pyramid he desired. This was the first structure that truly took the iconic shape of an Egyptian pyramid and would be used as a model for those that would be built in years to come. It was 105 meters high, nearly twice the height of Djoser's pyramid and the world's new tallest building, and its geometrical perfection was undeniable. When Sneferu died, he was buried in this pyramid according to his wishes, and his son took the throne. He would be the greatest pyramid builder of all. His name was Khufu. As a boy, Khufu must have seen his father, Sneferu, obsessed with the construction of his three pyramids. We can imagine the young prince listening in on his father's conversations with his architects, the tension and anger as the first two pyramids failed, and then the final triumph of the Red Pyramid, and perhaps as a boy, he dreamed of one day building such a monument for himself. We know very little about Khufu or what his reign was like, but it's clear that he was inspired by one thing, size, and above all, the desire to build the largest pyramid that would ever stand. Learning from his father's mistakes on the Bent Pyramid, and likely inheriting some of his architects, Khufu elected to build his tomb some 15 kilometers to the northwest of Saqqara, on a shelf of strong limestone just outside Memphis, at a place called Giza. When construction began on the Great Pyramid, there must have been some uncertainty about whether it would even be possible. It was built using an estimated 2.3 million large stone blocks, weighing a total of 6 million tons, and when its first layer was completed, it was the size of more than ten football pitches. Its builders used predominantly local limestone quarried from nearby on the Giza Plateau to build the pyramid's interior structure, and these were bound together
with lime mortar packed with straw and charcoal. Luckily, these organic remains in the pyramid mortar can be carbon dated, allowing archaeologists to date the pyramids with scientific certainty to this period. But while rough stone would do for the main body, the king's burial chamber at its heart was made of blocks of hard granite brought from Aswan since it needed to resist the crushing weight of millions of tons of stone above it. The fine limestone blocks of its outer shell were quarried at a place called Tura on the other side of the river. The stone from these quarries was of exceptional quality, a pale white in color, almost like marble. For this reason, it was highly prized for use on the interiors of tombs and the perfect casing for a pyramid. This limestone was cut out of underground tunnels in these quarries and dragged down to the banks of the Nile, where it was loaded onto barges to be carried downstream. In order to ease the transportation of these stones, the Egyptians dug a series of canals and artificial harbors that came right up to the base of the pyramids, one of which was known as She-Kufu, or the Pool of Kufu. One papyrus has been uncovered, the oldest ever found, that is the work journal of an overseer named Merer. In it, he records the process of this perhaps less than exhilarating task. Day 25. Inspector Merer spends the day hauling stones in Tura south, spends the night at Tura. Day 26. Inspector Merer casts off from Tura loaded with stone, spends the night at the Pool of Kufu. Day 27. Satsail loaded with stone, spends the night at the pyramid. Day 28. Casts off from the pyramid in the morning, sails up river to Tura south. Day 29. Inspector Merer spends the day hauling stones in Tura south, spends the night at Tura. Day 30. Inspector Merer spends the day hauling stones in Tura south, spends the night at Tura. Remarkably, the pyramid was oriented perfectly to true north, with one of its faces at each point of the compass, suggesting that the Egyptians must have used measurements of the stars in order to align it, the only method by which they could have achieved such accuracy. With the kingdom's now-exceptional organization, it's been estimated that it took only about 23 years to build, with the final stones being placed around 2560 BC. Upon its completion, the Great Pyramid of Giza would stand 147 meters high, or nearly 40 stories. It was the tallest man-made structure in the world and would remain so for nearly 4,000 years. The building that eventually surpassed it, the wooden spire of Lincoln Cathedral in England, completed in 1311, would stand for little more than two centuries before it collapsed in a storm. Today, Khufu has cemented his name into history with the construction of these monuments. But other than his ambitious pyramid, little else is known about him. The only representation of him ever found is a single statuette carved from ivory. Ironically for a man so obsessed with grand scale, this statue is only seven centimeters, or less than three inches, tall. When Khufu died around 2525 BC, his son Jadephre would take the throne. But his reign was short and when he died, another of Khufu's sons became pharaoh. His name was Khafre. The pharaoh Khafre would follow in his father's and grandfather's footsteps and build a grand pyramid of his own. He would place it right beside his father's, but for some reason, he declined to build it any higher. It could be that his builders, perhaps tiring of this mania for ever bigger and better pyramids, simply told him that it wouldn't be possible. to build any bigger. It may be that Khafre worried that it would have appeared unseemly to one-up his dead father quite so ostentatiously. Perhaps for this reason, Khafre's pyramid would be a deferential three and a half meters shorter than his father's, although he was sure to place it on a slightly higher shelf of limestone, meaning that from many angles it appears taller. Coupled with slightly steeper angled sides, this meant Khafre was also able to build his pyramid with perhaps 350,000 fewer stone blocks, a saving that his teams of laborers and stonemasons no doubt appreciated. Today, the pyramid of Khafre is the only pyramid at Giza to retain any of its original casing stones of smooth white Torah limestone which still cling to the top third of the structure, perhaps since its steeper sides made it more difficult for stone thieves to extract the very top of its masonry. This allows us to picture how these monuments would have looked in their golden age, the smooth white sides that must have gleamed blindingly in the desert sun, and at night, shone in the light of the moon. These pyramids were also likely capped with a stone known as a pyramidion, usually carved of diorite or granite and carved with hieroglyphs. Some examples of these pyramidions have been found with distinctive grooves that suggest that they were encased in a decorative metal, either copper or shining electrum, an alloy of gold and silver. Since the pyramidions for the Giza pyramids have never been found, it's unknown whether their tops were encased in metal. But if they were, it would have made them an even more impressive sight, a gleaming pinnacle reaching up to the heavens. Within only a hundred years or so of the construction of Djoser's first stepped pyramid, all of Egypt's largest pyramids had already been built, all by only three generations of the same family. But almost from the moment the final capstone was placed on Khafre's massive monument, enthusiasm for enormous pyramids began to wane. The pharaoh Menkaure, the son of Khafre and grandson of Khufu, also built his pyramid at Giza around 2510 BC, but his would be significantly smaller. It's not even a tenth the size of the Great Pyramid and only two-thirds the size of even Djoser's stepped pyramid. One explanation for this was that Menkaure didn't expect to live long enough to build such a grand construction as his predecessors. Herodotus records one piece of tradition about the pharaoh Menkaure which recounts how an oracle told him that his reign would be short. As a result, he determined to make the best of the time he had, and perhaps this left him little time for pyramid building. The king deemed this unjust and sent back to the oracle a message of reproach, blaming the god. Why must he die so soon, whereas his father and his uncle had lived long? He caused many lamps to be made and would light these at nightfall and drink and make merry. By day or night, he never ceased from reveling, roaming to the marsh country and the groves, and whenever he heard of the likeliest places of pleasure. Whether there's any truth to this or not, it's clear Menkaure had different priorities to Khufu and Khafre, and his more modest pyramid seems to have broken the spell of his family's one-upmanship. For the next thousand years, pharaohs would continue to build pyramid tombs, but they would be mostly at a much reduced scale and they would cut bigger and bigger corners in their construction. Instead of a solid limestone structure, these later monuments would often be a simple limestone shell encasing a core of mud brick or simply earth and sand. For this reason, little remains of these later pyramids, other than melancholy heaps, alone in the desert. Slowly, the practice would begin to die out altogether. The reason Egyptians stopped building pyramids was partly due to changes in religious attitudes towards burial, but it also seems to have stemmed from concern over tomb robbers. After all, a pyramid was essentially an enormous sign announcing to the world that the richest man in Egypt was buried there. From the earliest days, people were drawn to the tombs of long-dead kings to attempt to steal their treasures. One tomb inscription of a royal architect named Inenni gives us a clue about these changing priorities. He writes that he constructed his king's tomb not in an ostentatious declaration of power, but in total secrecy. I supervised the excavation of the cliff tomb of his majesty alone, no one seeing, no one hearing. Even with these secret tombs, grave robbers were still a constant concern. One pharaoh of the later New Kingdom would order an inspection of his predecessor's tombs, and his inspectors brought back troubling news. The tomb of the king, it was found that the evildoers have damaged it by forcing an opening into the main chamber of his tomb through the passage wall of the Sanctuary of Nebemen, superintendent of the grain stores of the king. In the funerary place, the body of the king had been removed and the tomb of his royal spouse, the royal lady of Nubshas, was empty. The robbers had laid violent hands on them. It wasn't just the precious treasures inside that were stolen. As the overseer Merer had found, cutting the limestone blocks from the quarries of Tura was one of the most time-consuming parts of construction. For this reason, pharaohs who felt more pressed for time sometimes despoiled previous pyramids of their cut stone in order to speed along their own monuments. One Middle Kingdom text known as the Instruction of Merikare advises kings against this shameful practice. Do not despoil the monument of another, but quarry stone in Tura. Do not build your tomb out of ruins, using what has been made for what is to be made. In place of constructing their own pyramids at Saqqara or Giza, the later pharaohs would be buried at a place near Thebes that the Egyptians called the great and majestic necropolis of the millions of years of the pharaoh, or sometimes the Great Field. But today, it is known as the Valley of the Kings. Here, a natural rock formation known as El Khurn or the Horn, rises above a series of dramatic red cliffs. When viewed from the entrance to the tombs here, this pointed peak somewhat resembles a natural pyramid. It's possible that this convenient landform may have relieved some of the pressure on Egypt's pharaohs and allowed them an equally prestigious place to be buried, while freeing up an untold amount of energy and manpower in the kingdom. Egypt's manual laborers could perhaps breathe a sigh of relief. Slowly, the age of the pyramids came to an end. Still, that was a long time in the future, and throughout the fourth and fifth dynasties of Egypt, royal monument construction continued confidently. But in the sixth dynasty, around the 23rd century BC, construction began to decline. Part of the reason for this was an increasing decentralization of the empire and a gradual weakening of the power of the king. The final pharaoh of the old kingdom was named Pepi II. He came to the throne at the age of six and ruled for more than 60 years. Pepi was an excitable and enthusiastic child, as we can see from one tomb inscription by one of his officials named Harkuf. Harkuf had a long and illustrious career. He served as the mayor of one of Egypt's southern provinces in the region of the Nile Cataract of Aswan, the narrow gate to the south. The highlight of his life was the four journeys of exploration he undertook on behalf of his pharaoh following the Nile down into the heart of Central Africa, into what the Egyptians called the Horizon Lands. He wrote a full account of one of these expeditions on the walls of his tomb. I accomplished it in seven months. I brought back from there all sorts of beautiful, exotic produce and was praised for it very greatly. I came back with 300 donkeys laden with incense, ebony, precious oil, grain, leopard skins and elephant tusks. The boy pharaoh Pepi was so delighted with Harkuf's trip that he wrote a letter directly to him. The letter was likely written on fragile papyrus and has not survived. But luckily, Harkuf was so proud of this sign of royal favor that he had the letter copied out word for word on the wall of his tomb, his proudest moment etched into stone for eternity. In it, we get a sense for the voice of this excitable young king. You know how to do what your lord loves and favors. You wake and you sleep planning to do what your lord loves, favors, and commands, unique friend Harkuf. Pepi was especially excited by a small man that Harkuf had come across in East Africa and had brought back with him, perhaps either a man with dwarfism or a member of the so-called pygmy tribes of Central Africa. You have further said in this message that you have brought a dwarf of the god's dancers from the land of the horizon dwellers. Come downstream to the residence at once, hurry, and bring with you this dwarf that you have brought, alive, prosperous and healthy, for the king. When he goes down with you into the boat, have excellent people around him on deck lest he fall in the water. My majesty wishes to see this particular dwarf more than the produce of the lands. However, as a pharaoh, Pepi was relatively ineffectual. During his childhood, his mother and grand viziers seemed to have done much of the ruling, and as an adult, he continued a relatively hands-off approach to the kingdom. For much of its history, Egypt had been governed by regional administrators known as nomarchs who were appointed by the pharaoh to rule over their regions on his behalf. Pepi's long reign saw an increasing amount of power passing to these regional governors. Gradually, their positions became hereditary rather than appointed, so that single families began to amass large amounts of power, and their tombs became larger and more elaborate with every passing year. These nomarchs were soon beginning to look a lot like feudal lords, or even petty kings, and even began fighting amongst themselves. Meanwhile, the once boy king Pepi was now entering his 70s, frail and increasingly detached from the business of ruling. This might not have been a death blow for the kingdom, but it was around this time that a record drought descended over Egypt and the entire eastern Mediterranean, starting around the year 2200 BC. This climate shift we have encountered before, it is known as the 4.2-kiloyear event and has been implicated in the collapse of the Akkadian Empire in Mesopotamia, and perhaps even the Indus Valley Civilization in India and Pakistan. In Egypt, the result of this event was a series of years in which the Nile floods were much reduced and agriculture came under immense pressure. The drought was so severe and long-lasting that the verdant lake at Fayyum, that once stood 65 meters deep, completely dried up over the next 50 years, and crop yields would have plummeted. The long reign of a pharaoh was usually good news for the kingdom. It tended to generate a period of stability and often prosperity, but when a king's rule went on too long, it had the tendency to create what we might call the old king problem. The long reign of the pharaoh Pepi
along with his multiple wives, meant that he had countless children, many of them now old men themselves, with children and grandchildren of their own. They were all impatient to see this old king pass on so that they would get their chance to rule. When Pepi finally died around 2175 BC, what followed was a succession crisis of immense proportions. The chaos serpent of Isfet now wound its way around all the lands of Egypt. In the two decades that followed, the kingdom would see no fewer than 17 pharaohs come and go, some perhaps dying of old age and others no doubt killed by their rivals.