Imagine the tombs of ancient kings lying opened and robbed, the fallen pillars of emptied temples half-buried in the sand which shift and roll over the stones as the great disk of the sun sets red and blazing for a final time on the empire of Egypt. One generation passes, another stays behind. Such has it been since the men of ancient times. The gods of long ago rest in their pyramids, and yet the great and blessed likewise lie buried in their tombs. Yet those who built great mansions, their places are no more. What has become of them all? I have heard their words retold time and again. But where are their dwellings now? Their walls are in ruins and their places are no more, like something that has never been. There is no return for them, to explain their present state of being, to say how it is with them, to gentle our hearts until we make our journey to the place where they have gone. So follow your heart and your happiness, conduct your affairs on earth as your heart dictates. For that day of mourning will surely come for you. So spend your days joyfully, and do not grow weary of living. No man takes his things with him, and none who go can ever come back again. Thank you once again for listening to the Fall of Civilizations podcast. I'd like to thank my voice actors for this episode, Alexandra Boulton, Lachlan Lucas, Michael Hagiantonis, Tom Marshall Lee, Nick Denton, Peter Walters, Ree Brignell, Lou Millington, and Paul Cassell. Readings in Arabic were performed by Nassim el-Bujufi. Readings in Ancient Egyptian were performed by Seknenre, Mohamed Habib. I'd also like to thank my historical advisor for this episode, the Egyptologist Dr. Chris Naughton. You can find him on social media as at Chris Naughton. You can also read his book titled Searching for the Lost Tombs of Egypt. Major sources used in this episode were The Rise and Fall of Ancient Egypt by Toby Wilkinson, as well as his Writings from Ancient Egypt, Edward Wenter's Letters from Ancient Egypt, Miriam Lichtheim's Ancient Egyptian Literature, The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt, edited by Ian Shaw, and Mark van der Meerhoop's History of Ancient Egypt. Abdul Latif al-Baghdadi's Account of Egypt was translated by Tim McIntosh-Smith. A full list of sources can be found in the description below and are publicly available on the show's Patreon page. As some of you may be aware, Fall of Civilizations will soon be available in book form around the world. The book is called Fall of Civilizations Stories of Greatness and Decline by me, Paul Cooper. It offers the definitive version of the show, updated, expanded, and with maps and images attached. The book is coming in April of 2024 for UK readers and later in the year for listeners in the United States. Please head to fallofcivilizations.com to find out more information and for pre-order links. Every pre-order helps boost the book's rankings and supports the show. I'd love to hear your thoughts and responses on Twitter, so please come and tell me what you thought. You can follow me at Paul M.M. Cooper and if you'd like updates about the podcast, announcements about new episodes, as well as images, maps, and reading suggestions, you can follow the podcast at Fall of Civ Pod, with underscores separating the words. This podcast can only keep going with the support of our generous subscribers on Patreon. You keep me running, you help me cover my costs, and you help keep the podcast ad-free. You also let me dedicate more time to researching, writing, recording, and editing to get the episodes out to you faster and bring as much life and detail to them as possible. I want to thank all my subscribers for making this happen. If you enjoyed this episode, please consider heading to patreon.com forward slash fallofcivilizations underscore podcast, or just google Fall of Civilizations Patreon, that's P-A-T-R-E-O-N, to contribute something and help keep the podcast running. For now, all the best and thanks for listening.