These are each places where the river becomes shallow and travel by boat becomes difficult, and so they were natural stops along any journey upriver. They were also the obvious place to draw borders. During the Middle Kingdom, Egypt marched into the horizon lands multiple times and pushed its southern border as far as the second cataract. Around the 1860s BC, one Middle Kingdom king named Senusret III marched even further south into the Nubian kingdoms of Cush and Punt. He remembers this brutal campaign in one inscription. The Nubians are wretches, craven-hearted. My majesty has seen it. It is not an untruth. I have captured their women. I have carried off their subjects, poisoned their wells, killed their cattle, cut down their grains, set fire to it. In this remorseless fashion, Senusret marched beyond the second cataract and built a powerful set of fortresses. We get a sense for their purpose from the names the Egyptians gave to them. One of them at Askut was named Crushing the Nubians, while another at Shalfak was named Subduing the Foreign Lands. In another imposing fortress at Semna, now more than 400 kilometers upstream from the former border of Aswan, Senusret left a stone monument with the following triumphant inscription. Year 16, third month of winter, the king made his southern boundary. I have made my boundary further south than my father's. I have added to what was bequeathed me. As for any son of mine who shall maintain this border which my majesty has made, he is my son. But he who abandons it, who fails to fight for it, he is not my son. He was not born to me. These forts were manned by powerful units of Egyptian soldiers, tasked with keeping order among the newly colonized Nubians. To this end, they engaged in a paranoid surveillance regime of the local people. To the pharaoh Senusret, they sent back constant updates on papyrus scrolls about the movements of even the most minute groups of Nubians, some of which have survived. The patrol who went forth to patrol the desert edge from the fortress Kesev-Mejau in year three, month three of the growing season, last day have come to report to me saying we have found the tracks of 32 men and three donkeys. All these dispatches end in the same way, with the same comforting offer of reassurance to the king. All the affairs of the king's domain are safe and sound. All the affairs of the master are safe and sound. But we have reason to believe that King Senusret was not entirely reassured. He is famous for the numerous sculptures he had made of himself, statues carved from black diorite that depict him in strangely realistic fashion, unlike any depictions of a pharaoh that had come before. In these statues, his ears are extended to enormous proportions like a bat, perhaps projecting the image of a king who heard every movement in his kingdom, relayed by
his extensive system of spies. Three of these statues in particular show the king first as a boy, then as a man, and finally in old age. In this final statue, we get a sense for the mental toll it took on a man to sit at the top of this paranoid system, the pharaoh's weary, sunken eyes, his haggard face contorted in an expression of eternal worry. Today, these three statues stand as a kind of metaphor for the state the Egyptian Middle Kingdom had sunk into during its final decades. Senusret's son, Amenemhat III, did just as his father's inscriptions had urged, and held the southern border against the Nubians. But following his reign, Egypt was once more plunged into a succession crisis. The crisis was so severe that their next king was something that had until then been almost unthinkable, a woman. Her name was Sobeknefru, possibly the daughter, sister, or wife of the previous pharaoh. She was probably not the first woman to hold power in Egypt, but she was the first one to attain the full official title of a king. Sobeknefru used masculine titles in her inscriptions, and one statue of her even shows her wearing an unconventional mixture of male and female clothing. However, she did not succeed in slowing the dynasty's decline. She died after ruling for only four years and did not leave any heirs. After that, the serpent Isfet uncoiled once more, and Egypt slid into chaos. During the time that followed, known as the Second Intermediate Period, there were 150 years during which at least 50 kings ruled. Egypt once again split in two, and local governors stopped mentioning the king in their tomb inscriptions. The pyramids of this period had already become small and meager, mostly built from mud brick. But now, their construction stopped altogether. Some kings were even buried in simple shaft tombs, little better than commoners. Much of the Nile Delta of Lower Egypt had already broken away from the empire, and now in the south, the people of Nubia were in open rebellion. One by one, the Egyptians were forced to let go of their southern forts, abandoning them to the Nubians. Once a symbol of the empire's confidence, these powerful fortresses now became unprecedented military assets for their enemies, and bases from which powerful raiding parties ranged ever farther into Egypt. The cruelty that the Egyptians had shown to their Nubian neighbors was now being paid back in full. With the northern and southern borders convulsed in conflict, Egypt's trade links with the rest of the world were severely disrupted. It was also during this time, or perhaps later, that the entire Mediterranean, in fact most of the world, witnessed one of the largest natural disasters in human history, that is, the eruption of the volcano Thera, now known as the Greek island of Santorini, only 700 kilometers from the Egyptian coast. It's likely that the Egyptians would have heard the deep boom of this explosion, which went off with the force of several hundred atomic bombs. When the Indonesian volcano Krakatoa erupted in 1883, the explosion was heard more than 3,000 kilometers away, and it's thought that the Thera explosion was at least four times more powerful. Today, the seawater-filled volcanic crater left by the eruption is more than 10 kilometers wide. This event may have ejected more than 40 square kilometers of rock into the atmosphere. The black plume would have been riven with volcanic lightning and it would have triggered tsunamis 10 meters high that would have devastated coastal regions, as well as causing a volcanic winter. The eruption may have wiped out the Minoan civilization on Crete in one blow, perhaps inspiring part of the
Atlantis myth, and chronicles as far away as China record a period when the sky turned a strange yellow color and crop yields fell. One Egyptian inscription known as the Tempest Stele may record some memory of this terrifying event. The gods expressed their discontent. The gods made the sky come with a tempest. It caused darkness in the western region. The sky was unleashed, more powerful on the mountains than the turbulence of the cataract at Aswan. Each house, each shelter that they reached were floating in the water like the barks of papyrus outside the royal residence for days. Volcanic ash or tephra would have begun to rain down on the whole region and today can be detected at virtually every site in the eastern Mediterranean. Spurred by this natural disaster and exacerbated by the collapse of the Egyptian administration, soon famine once more descended on the land. Among all of this, a powerful and mysterious force of outsiders must have been watching. They came from the eastern Mediterranean region, from across the Sinai Desert, and they intended to conquer Egypt and rule it for themselves. These people were known as the Hyksos. The word Hyksos comes from the Egyptian phrase Heqau Qesut, meaning rulers of foreign lands. Where exactly the Hyksos were from is unknown, but it's thought they may have originated in the region of Syria. One thing seems to have been behind their great military success, and that was the chariot. At this point, some form of chariot had been used by various societies for many centuries. Vehicles like a kind of war cart with four solid wooden wheels pulled by donkeys are depicted on the Sumerian Standard of Ur, which was created around the time that the Pyramids of Giza were being built. But Egypt had never experimented with this kind of vehicle, and over the preceding millennium, the technology had taken huge leaps forward. The chariots that the Hyksos brought into Egypt for the first time had two wheels with spokes, light and fast, and they were each pulled by two powerful animals that had been recently introduced to the region, the horse. These chariots were strong and mobile battle platforms that could break enemy battle lines, while on-board archers with powerful bows could pelt enemies with missiles. Whether the Hyksos arrived in Egypt as a violent invasion or a more peaceful migration is somewhat up for debate. People from the north had been settling in the Nile Delta for centuries, and much of the population there was already what the Egyptians would consider foreign by the time the Hyksos rulers arrived. But the Hyksos were clearly not pacifists. They set up their own kingdom in the Nile Delta with its capital at Avaris, and in a devastating blow to Egyptian morale, even swept south to capture the ancient capital of Memphis. One much later source named Manetho records the arrival of the Hyksos. By main force, they easily seized the country without striking a blow, and having overpowered the rulers of the land, they then burned our cities ruthlessly, razed to the ground the temples of the gods. Finally, they appointed as king one of the number. He had his seat at Memphis, levying tribute from Upper and Lower Egypt, and always leaving garrisons behind in the most advantageous positions. The pyramids, that great symbol of Egyptian prestige, were now in foreign hands. Egyptian kings would now retreat back to their former in Upper Egypt, the city of Thebes. With the Nubians increasingly powerful in the south, and now the new threat of these Hyksos kings looming from the north, the weakened Egyptians increasingly felt like they were being crushed in a vice. For a time, it must have seemed like the age of an independent Egypt was over. One king named Camoza, who came to the throne of Thebes around 1555 BC, would put this intolerable situation in the following terms. I should like to know what serves this strength of mine when a chieftain is in Avaris and another in Cush, and I sit united with an Asiatic and a Nubian, each in possession of his slice of Egypt, and I cannot pass by him as far as Memphis. No man can settle down when despoiled by the taxes of the Asiatics. I will grapple with him, that I may rip open his belly. My wish is to save Egypt and to smite the Asiatic. King Camoza may have had a very personal reason to hate the Hyksos. The mummified remains of the previous pharaoh, his father, have been uncovered, and modern analysis shows that he suffered brutal wounds to the head from a heavy bladed weapon. These blows must have sliced his cheek and fractured his jaw and skull, leading many to conclude that he died on the battlefield. The king's body was then rushed back to Thebes, where it was hastily mummified. If Prince Camoza saw his father's body in this state as it was carried back into the city, we can only imagine the kind of hatred that must have burned in his heart towards the Hyksos invaders in the north. But many in Camoza's court were clearly afraid of what a war with the Hyksos would do to the fragile state of the country. One text known as the Carnarvon Tablet describes how they appealed to their king to maintain the peace. We are tranquil in our part of Egypt. Our swan at the first cataract is strong, and the middle part of the land is with us. Men till for us the finest of their lands. They allow our cattle to pasture in the papyrus marshes. Corn is sent for our swine. Our cattle are not taken away. He holds the land of the Asiatics. We hold Egypt. Only when one comes against us should we act against him. As Camoza refused. He wanted to strike a blow at the Hyksos, but he knew that he would have to secure the southern border first, and recapture the old fortress of Buhen just before the second cataract of the Nile. Buhen was one of the strong-walled bastions built by Senesret III, and it was one of the only forts the Egyptians built from stone rather than brick. But since the collapse of the Middle Kingdom, its garrison had served a Nubian lord from the kingdom of Kush. If the southern border was to hold while Camoza expelled the Hyksos in the north, he would need to recapture the fort of Buhen. Camoza marched south, preparing to assault the fort, but it seems that upon sighting the enormous Egyptian army on the horizon, the citizens of the fortress got the message, and decided to swear allegiance to the pharaoh without a fight. With this powerful fort now holding the south, Camoza marched back to Thebes and prepared for the next campaign season, when he would seek to bring war to the Hyksos and unite Egypt once more. In the third year of his reign, Camoza struck. I sailed north in my might to repel the Asiatics through the command of Amun, with my brave army before me like a flame of fire and the archers atop our fighting decks. Camoza's fleet descended swiftly on the Hyksos in what appears to have been something of a surprise attack. Put off guard, the foreigners were defeated, and the vengeance of Camoza was terrible. When day dawned, I was upon him as if it were a hawk. When breakfast time came, I overthrew him, having destroyed his walls and slaughtered his people, and made his wife descend to the riverbank. My army acted like lions with their spoil, chattels, cattle, fat, honey, dividing their things, their hearts' joy. As for Avaris on the two rivers, I laid it waste without inhabitants. I destroyed their towns and burned their homes to reddened ruin heaps forever. Because of the destruction they had wrought in the midst of Egypt, they who had allowed themselves to hearken to the call of the Asiatics had forsaken Egypt, their mistress. The king of the Hyksos immediately appealed to his Nubian ally, the king of Kush, for help. At one point, the Egyptians intercepted a secret message travelling south along the desert roads, the contents of which they recorded. Have you noticed what Egypt has done against me? The ruler who is there, Kamosi, penetrates my territory even though I have not attacked him as he has you. He chooses these two lands in order to afflict them, my land and yours, and he has ravaged them. Come northward, do not flinch, then we shall divide up the towns of Egypt. When this messenger returned to the embattled Hyksos king, shamefaced and with the letter undelivered, he must have known that all was lost. The war came to a swift end and Kamosi recounts, with perhaps some exaggeration, his heroic return to Thebes. What a happy home trip for the ruler, life, prosperity, happiness. With his army ahead of him, they had no casualties, nor did anyone blame his fellow, nor did their hearts weep. I moored on home soil during the season of inundation. The riverbank was resplendent. Thebes was festive. Women and men had come to see me. Every woman hugged her neighbour. No one was tearful. His son, Achmosa, would press this advantage, and in an even more devastating campaign, seized the ancient capital of Memphis. Achmosa would be the first pharaoh in at least a hundred years to recapture the great pyramids of Giza. We can imagine his feelings as he gazed up at the monuments of his ancestors, Khufu and Khafre, by now already more than a thousand years old. It's clear that the sight inspired him, and he would even build a pyramid of his own in Upper Egypt at the site of Abydos. This was one of the first pyramids built for an Egyptian pharaoh since the fall of the Middle Kingdom, and it was clearly designed as a symbol of renewal of the empire's great legacy. But it would also be the last ever pyramid built by an Egyptian ruler. After securing the Nile Delta, Achmosa marched north and even crossed the Sinai, smashing through the traditional heartland of the Hyksos people and seizing territory in Palestine, in the region of modern Gaza. After that, he returned to the southern people of Kush and pushed the empire's borders farther south than they had ever been, beyond the second cataract to the river island of Sai, now in northern Sudan. From its lowest ebb, Egypt had suddenly re-emerged as a major regional power. This was the age of the New Kingdom. During the five centuries of the New Kingdom, Egypt would reach its greatest territorial extent and construct some of its most impressive monuments and artifacts. Despite recapturing Memphis, its kings saw no reason to move the capital again, and so they now once again ruled from the city of Thebes, far up the river in Upper Egypt. By now, Egypt had also adopted the technology of the horse-drawn chariot from their Hyksos foes, and its armies were now made up of powerful contingents of these vehicles. During these centuries, Egypt saw the rule of its first great woman pharaoh, Hatshepsut, who was one of its most prolific builders. She constructed the towering temple complex at Karnak, and the stately mortuary temple known as the Holy of Holies. She also undertook a voyage in five ships to the land of Punt, somewhere in Africa,
brought back incense trees and other goods to Egypt, which she celebrated in one inscription. The ships returned with the marvels of the land of Punt, and with all the good woods of Tanuta, with heaps of incense, with trees producing green fragrance, with ebony and pure ivory, with gold and green agates found in the land of the Amu, with hides of the panthers of the south. Never since the beginning of the world have the like of these wonders been brought by any king. The New Kingdom would also see some of the most striking dramas emerge in the royal courts of Egypt. Of these, none have drawn so much attention as the story of one pharaoh. He has been described by some as a revolutionary, by others as a visionary, and by others still as simply insane. He was a ruler named Amunhotep IV. Amunhotep came to the throne around 1350 BC. He had inherited his name from his father, who had ruled as Amunhotep III. Like most Egyptian names, it included the name of a god, Amun, and it meant Amun is satisfied. Amun had long been the god of the city of Thebes, and was considered the god of fertility and of the wind. But when the Hyksos were expelled from Egypt and Thebes became the capital once more, this god Amun was given something of a promotion. He was unified with the sun god Ra to create a compound deity now known as Amun-Ra, the perfect symbol of the power of a new, united Egypt. Amun-Ra was depicted as a man bearing a golden staff and wearing a high crown, and later would be shown with blue skin. This new deity was placed at the head of all the various gods that the Egyptians worshipped, the king of the gods and creator of the universe. One hymn to Amun-Ra describes the primacy of his position. Lord of truth, father of the gods, maker of men, creator of all animals, lord of things that are, creator of the staff of life. The pharaoh Amun-Hotep IV would keep his name for the first four years of his rule. But around his fifth year on the throne, he made the unprecedented decision to change his royal name. That's because he had a vision of a new system of belief that he wanted to spread over all of Egypt. He wanted to do away with the messiness of Egyptian religion and the system of different gods in different cities, different temples and cults and priests. He devised a new system of worship that focused not on any god, but on the sun itself, which he seems to have believed was his true father. This new god would be depicted as a bare, impersonal disk showering the earth with beams of light. It would be called simply the orb, or in Egyptian, the Aten. One surviving hymn to the Aten, perhaps even written by the pharaoh himself, shows the enormous power this new god was supposed to have. O soul god, like whom there is no other, thou didst create the world according to thy desire. You are in my heart, there is no other who knows you. Every land chatters at his rising every day.