His reign had been one of Egypt's golden ages, but his long rule had once again created that old king problem. All of his heirs were now also old men. By the time of his death, twelve of his oldest sons had already died, and now his thirteenth son took the throne at the age of about 70. He was the pharaoh Merneptah. But only a few years into this man's reign, Egypt was attacked by a devastating new enemy. These were the Libyan people to the west of the Nile Delta. The king of Libya, a man named Merire, had seemingly planned his attack for some time. All of a sudden, a large Libyan army suddenly flooded through Egypt's northwestern border, and they were reinforced with groups of people from all over the Mediterranean, perhaps from Greece, Sardinia, Sicily, and elsewhere across the sea. These were a diverse group of peoples that had suddenly begun to appear in increasing numbers across the eastern Mediterranean. They would later become known as the Sea Peoples. The pharaoh Merneptah remembers this event on one carved stelae. The wretched fallen chief of Libya, Merire, son of dead, has fallen upon the country of Tehunu with his bowmen. Sherdan, Shekelesh, Ekwesh, Luka, Tiresh, taking the best of every warrior and every man of war of his country. He has brought his wife and his children, leaders of the camp, and he has reached the western boundary in the fields of Perea. The pharaoh Merneptah defeated this invasion, and as a warning to any others who would try a surprise attack, he had many of the invading soldiers impaled along the road into Memphis. The princes are prostrate, saying, Mercy! Not one raises his head among the nine bows. Desolation is for Tehenu. Hati is pacified, plundered as the Canaan with every evil. Her eyes become a widow. All lands together they are pacified. But these lands would not stay pacified for long. After the death of the pharaoh Merneptah around 1204 BC, Egypt entered a period of civil strife, with the descendants of Ramesses fighting over who would take the crown. Against this backdrop, the entire region also once again began to experience a series of record droughts. What caused this climate shift is uncertain. As we saw in our second episode on the Bronze Age collapse, the cause may have been volcanic, with a large eruption taking place in the Icelandic volcano of Hekla around this time. Others have proposed that an eruption in Sicily around 1300 BC may have been to blame, or that the supervolcano Thera in Santorini may have resumed some activity some 500 years after its last enormous eruption. The cause may not have been volcanic at all, and could have been due to variations in the sun's activity, or weather systems in the Atlantic depriving the Mediterranean of moisture. The reality was much as it is today. The planet's climate system is fragile, interconnected, and chaotic, and even relatively small changes in its equilibrium can have devastating effects. During this time, formerly green lands became dry and arid, and more plants suited to desert landscapes flourished. Analysis of sediment cores and oxygen isotopes in cave mineral deposits have all shown that the 13th and 12th centuries BC saw much less rain than the preceding centuries. Alongside this scientific evidence, we can see marks of severe drought in the region's written records too. Europe's great rivals, the Hittites, in their stony mountains, were hit particularly hard by the drought. One Hittite text has come down to us that seems to capture the spirit of this age, and it is known as the myth of Telepino. It comes from a poetic convention known as the vanishing god myth, which describes how a certain deity is so offended by the misdeeds of humanity that he flies into a fit of sorrow and abandons his duties. Telepino was a god of farming, fertility, and the weather. The beginning of the text has been lost, so we don't know what it was humanity did to provoke his rage, but the poem describes its deadly consequences. Whereupon soot beset the windows, smoke beset the house, the ashes lay crammed on the hearth. Off stalked Telepino, grain and abundance he took away from field and meadow. Off to the copses stalked Telepino, and in a copse he buried himself. Forthwith the seed ceased to yield produce, oxen, sheep, and men ceased to breed, while even those that had conceived did not bear. Hillsides were bare, trees were bare, and put forth no new branches. Pastures were bare, springs ran dry. A famine arose in the land, men and gods alike were about to perish of hunger. While the Egyptians may have celebrated this weakening of their great rival, in Egypt, the situation was hardly any better. One text dated to around the year 1200 BC is called the Lament to Amun, and it stands as a wail of sorrow in a darkening age. Come to me, Father Amun. Protect me in this bitter year of confrontation. God shines in the sun, yet he will not shine. Winter crowds hard upon summer. Months happen backwards. Disheveled hours lurch drunken by. Those cut down in high places cry out to you, Amun. These words came on the poisoned air, spoken by herdsmen in fields and marshes, by those who beat clothes on the banks of the river, by district police deserting their precincts, by horned beasts on our burning deserts. From this period of unrest and the chaos in Egypt's royal court, which lasted for about a century, a military strongman named Setnachte would eventually rise to power. He would rule for only three years before dying and passing the throne on to his young son. This boy was the empire's last hope to turn around its floundering fortunes, and if such a hope was to be sustained, there was only one name he could possibly rule under. His parents would name him after his great predecessor, who had ruled nearly a century before and fought at the Battle of Kadesh, and so this boy would rule as Ramesses III. This new boy-king, Ramesses, was a determined and tenacious ruler, and it's clear that he openly admired and sought to emulate the legendary Pharaoh of old. He even went so far as to name all his own sons after the sons of Ramesses II, and also gave them all the same positions in his court. It was clear he wanted to do everything he could to recreate the glory days that had slipped out of Egypt's grasp, as he writes in one of his inscriptions. Rejoice ye, O Egypt, to the height of heaven, for I am ruler of the south and north upon the throne of Atum. The gods have appointed me to be king over Egypt, to be victor, to expel them for her from the countries. They decreed to me the kingdom while I was a child, and my reign is full of plenty. Under other circumstances, Ramesses might have been one of Egypt's great rulers, but the entire region was soon to be convulsed in a series of bitter wars. One of the great drivers of these conflicts was the loose collection of peoples that had first appeared in the reign of the Pharaoh Merneptah, and who are known as the Sea Peoples. These invaders were now descending on the entire region in ever greater numbers, apparently spurred by widespread crop failures in northern and western Europe. Already powerful trading cities like the port town of Ugarit had been attacked by sea, seemingly by complete surprise, and they were destroyed so thoroughly that they were never reoccupied. The Egyptians' great rivals, the Hittites, were now on the brink of collapse as trade networks around the region went into freefall. Ramesses remembers this time of strife as these northern invaders descended on the coast. The countries, the northerners in their isles were disturbed, swept away in battle. Not one stood before their lands. From Keta, Karchemish, Arvat, Alasa, they were wasted. They set up a camp in one place in Amor. They desolated his people and his land like that which is not. When news of the Sea People's attacks came to Ramesses, he would have been Pharaoh for about eight years. He had already repelled two further invasions from Libya and must have
been rising in confidence, but the news troubled him and soon he got word that the fleet of the Sea Peoples was on the move and were heading to Egypt, as he recounts in the inscription on his mortuary temple at Medinet Habu. They came with fire prepared before them, forward to Egypt. Their main support was Peleset. Thekel, Shekelesh, Denyen, and Weshesh. Their lands were united and they laid their hands upon the land as far as the circle of the earth. Their hearts were confident, full of their plans. Ramesses knew that these attackers would have to be stopped and he decided that he would make his stand at the mouth of the Nile, the lush, fertile delta. He would have to play to what strengths the Egyptian army still had in this challenging terrain. He decided to lay an ambush and give the Sea Peoples a surprise attack of their own. Now, it happened through this god, the lord of gods, that I was prepared and armed to trap them like wild fowl. I equipped my frontier at Zayi, prepared before them. The chiefs, the captains of infantry, the nobles, I caused to equip the harbor mouths like a strong wall, with warships, galleys, and barges. They were manned completely from bow to stern, with valiant warriors bearing their arms, soldiers of all the choicest of Egypt, being like lions roaring upon the mountaintops. Their horses were quivering in their every limb, ready to crush the countries under their feet. As the enemy's ships amassed, Ramesses gathered archers on the banks, supported by spearmen and cavalry in their thousands, all concealed in the reeds. The tension must have been tremendous. All the soldiers of the Egyptian army, holding their breath and waiting for that first sign of an enemy ship. Then at last, a sail was sighted. After that came another and another, until the whole fleet of the Sea Peoples was in sight. The Egyptians must have been able to hear the creak of 10,000 oars, the beating of the drums, the shouts of the helmsmen and soldiers. Then, once the Sea Peoples' ships were within range, Ramesses struck. Arrows flew out of the reeds and rained down on the ships. Panicked, the invaders attempted to land on the banks, but as they did, the Egyptian spearmen appeared out of the treeline and met them with a shield wall. While the enemy was held at bay, the Egyptian navy sailed in down the river. Those who reached my boundary, their heart and their soul are finished forever and ever. As for those who had assembled before them on the sea, the full flame was in their front, before the harbor mouth, and a wall of metal upon the shore surrounded them. They were dragged, overturned, and laid low upon the beach, slain, and made heaps from stern to bow of their galleys, while all their things were cast upon the water. Thus, I turned back the waters to remember Egypt, and when they even mention my name in their land, may it consume them with fear. The pharaoh's plan had worked. The Egyptians were the first people to turn back these seagoing invaders and stop their campaign of destruction. Ramesses' inscription at Medinet Habu ends on the following triumphant note. Rejoice ye, O Egypt, of the height of heaven, for I am ruler of the south and north upon the throne of Adam. I have expelled your mourning which was in your heart, and I have made you dwell in peace. Those whom I have overthrown shall not return. But despite their victory, the land of the pharaohs now stood alone in a devastated region. other society around them had been gutted and reduced to ash. Numerous long established civilizations, the Mycenaean Greeks, the Hittites, Ugarit, and Babylon had collapsed, and civil order had given way to chaos. The precarious trade routes on which they had all relied to supply them with bronze and other commodities were now broken, and Egypt's economy went into a steep and unstoppable decline. By the end of this period, which has become known as the Late Bronze Age Collapse, Egypt was a shadow of its former self. As other enemies encroached on its borders, Egypt was able to fight them off, but its treasury became so depleted that it never fully recovered its imperial power. The first workers strike in recorded history happened during the 29th year of Ramses III's reign, when Egypt could no longer provide food rations for its elite artisans who were constructing the king's tomb in the village of Deir el-Medina. The lack of rations went on so long that the workers eventually marched through the town, shouting the following chant. We're hungry. There's no more clothing, no more oil, no more fish, no more vegetables. Send word to the Pharaoh. If food was not reaching these crucial workers, we can only imagine the dire situation in the wider kingdom. The dispute dragged on for weeks, with one leader of the protest even threatening to damage a royal monument if they were not paid. It was a threat that they would never have dared to make unless the authority of the Pharaoh was beginning to be seriously undermined. Ramses III ruled for another two decades after his battle with the Sea Peoples, for a total reign of 31 years. But by the year 1156 BC, some members of his family were beginning to get impatient. In the Egyptian court, all of the women, the king's wives and mother, and other consorts all lived together in a large palace complex with its own land. This was convenient for the king but it could also encourage courtly intrigue. There was a strict hierarchy to the Pharaoh's queens, and everyone knew that the children of his main wife were to be his heirs before any others. Some of the women who were lower down on this ladder could at times resort to plotting to improve their stations, and perhaps get their own sons on the throne instead. One of these women was a queen named Teie. Teie was a secondary wife of Ramses, and her son Pentawerr was not in line for the throne. In order to remedy this situation, she began a plot that would go down in history as the Haram Conspiracy. Soon, she brought in other members of the king's household, and even high-ranking members of the government, as one later papyrus records. They are the abomination of the land. The great criminal who was then chief of the chamber was in collusion with Teie and the women of the Harem. He had made common cause with them. He had begun to bring out their words to their mothers and their brothers who were there saying, stir up the people, incite rebellion against their lord. Alarmingly, one of the palace women had written to her brother named Kayem Waset, a commander of Nubian troops in the south, and gained his support for their plot. Others had even turned to supernatural methods, making wax effigies of the king's bodyguards and laying curses on them to help their scheme. Their plan was clear, to kill Ramesses and install Queen Teie's son Pentawerr as pharaoh. The date they chose to strike was during the annual ceremony known as the beautiful Festival of the Valley, which was held in Thebes every year at the new moon of the second month of the harvesting season of Shemu. During this festival, which was one of the
biggest of the year, the pharaoh would go down to the river in a grand and colorful procession, carrying the statues of the three gods of Thebes, Amun, Mut, and Khonsu. He would then board his royal barge and sail with the statues down to the Theban necropolis to visit his grand temple, as one inscription by a Theban priest describes. We go, giving praise to Amun, kissing the ground before the lords of the gods on his festivals, the first day of Shemu shining, on the day of voyaging to the valley. Here, the citizens would give offerings of food and drink and flowers as the boats sailed on the river with the three statues. As the riotous, days-long festival progressed, the plotters took advantage of the disruption to make a strike at the king. It was day 15 of Shemu when the pharaoh was relaxing in the royal harem in the western tower of Medinet Habu, perhaps thinking ahead to his role in the coming festivities, when a group of assassins crept up on him with knives. Their attack was swift and brutal. Modern scanning of Ramesses III's mummy reveals that his throat was cut right to the bone with a sharp weapon, severing the trachea, esophagus, and major blood vessels. Death would have followed within seconds. Ramesses has no defensive wounds, suggesting that he was caught completely unawares. But curiously, his big toe was severed at the time of the attack. This seems like an unlikely injury to sustain during a struggle, and studies of his mummy have shown that the Mbamas fashioned him a prosthetic toe to take with him into the afterlife. This suggests that the original toe was never recovered, perhaps indicating that someone took it as proof that he was dead, or as a grisly trophy. Ramesses III had saved Egypt from the sea peoples, but now he lay dying in a pool of his own blood, betrayed by his own family. But the conspirator's plot would not go as planned. In the aftermath of the bloody assassination, the son of Ramesses III was able to crush the coup and seize the throne. The plotters were all put on trial, as well as any who had heard about the conspiracy but failed to report it. In all, 28 people were executed, and as a final punishment, they were even cruelly renamed after their deaths. The brother of one of the plotters, who had commanded his Nubian troops in the south, was originally named Kayemwaset, a name which meant came from Thebes. But after his execution, he was renamed Binemwaset, or evil in Thebes. Another's name, Merira, meant beloved of Ra, but he was given the somewhat spiteful new name, Mesedzura, or Ra hates him. Although order had been restored to the royal succession, Egypt was in a much reduced state. The death of Ramesses was followed by years of bickering among his heirs. Three of his sons would become king at different times, each feeling the need to memorialize him and shore up their own legitimacy by reigning as Ramesses IV, VI, and VIII. In fact, the next eight pharaohs in a row would all be named Ramesses after the slain king. But many of these rulers were ineffectual and reigned for only a few years each. Meanwhile, Egypt was increasingly beset by continuing droughts, lack of seasonal floodwaters, famines, civil unrest, and official corruption. Against this backdrop by the rule of Ramesses XI, a new power had begun to fill the vacuum left by royal authority. These were the high priests of Amun in Thebes. This priesthood had become not only very powerful, but exceedingly wealthy, through a century's-long display of fortune. Some say it had been thanks to the deceit of Amun and the deception of his spy,
long game of acquisition, the Amun priests now controlled two-thirds of all the temple lands in Egypt and 90% of all Egypt's ships, along with mountains of gold. On top of that, they were the chief prophets and interpreters of the god Amun-Ra's will, wielding a great deal of influence over the kings and their decisions. Over the last centuries, they had changed the rules of the priesthood so that they could pass their positions on to their sons, essentially becoming a kind of feudal royalty in the baking hot lands of Upper Egypt. One inscription on the tomb of a high priest named Nebwen-Eneph describes the power of this new hereditary role. You are now high priest of Amun. His treasury and his granary are under your seal. You are chief executive of his temple and every foundation of his is under your authority. The house of Hathor, lady of Denderah, shall now be under the authority of your son as heir to the offices of your forefathers, the position which you have occupied hitherto. Soon, the high priests in Thebes became the de facto rulers of Upper Egypt, even having themselves buried in grand tombs and commanding their own armies. In many ways, the pharaoh had become something of an irrelevance, and perhaps for that reason, there would not be a Ramses XII. With the death of Ramses XI, the Egyptian New Kingdom finally fractured. Less than 80 years after the victorious battle with the Sea Peoples, Egypt would never regain its former power. For the next four centuries, Egypt's influence would undergo a steady but unstoppable decline.