The only one of these kings to survive more than a year on the throne was a man named Ibi, who even somewhat optimistically tried his hand at building a pyramid at the royal burial ground of Saqqara. But this monument was a testament to the now much-reduced state of the empire. Standing at little more than 30 meters high, it was smaller than the pyramids of some of the earlier king's wives. On top of that, it was lazily constructed around a core of mud and limestone chips. King Ibi, the man who was to be buried under this sad monument, ruled for only two years, one month and a day, and likely did not control all of Egypt. Now, local nomarch governors declared independence and ruled their provinces alone. Their tombs around this time stop referring to the reign of a pharaoh and are full of boasts and elaborate titles that they seem to have invented for themselves. One tomb inscription for a powerful nomarch named Aktifi demonstrates how the centralized power of the king was declining. I am the vanguard of the men, the rear guard of the men, a leader of the land through active conduct, strong in speech collected in thought. For I am without peer who spoke out when people were silent, on the day of fear, when Upper Egypt was silent. Aktifi recalls the time of famine that swept over the land as crisis after crisis rocked the struggling old kingdom. All of Upper Egypt was dying of hunger to such a degree that everyone had come to eating his children, but I managed that no one died of hunger in this province. The entire country had become like a starved grasshopper, with people going to the north and to the south in search of grain. Egypt was now fracturing into something like the shape it had been before King Namer had fused it into a stable, centralized state nearly 800 years before. Refugees were flooding the roads. Another later Egyptian writer called Ipuwer, who lived in the period following this chaos, describes people resorting to theft to survive and violence spreading. The guardians of the house say, let us go and steal. The snares of birds have formed themselves into armed bands. The peasants of the delta have provided themselves with shields. A man regards his son as his enemy. The wrongdoer is in every place. The inundation of the Nile comes, yet no one goes out to plow. Ipuwer describes a widespread economic collapse during which trade from foreign lands dried up. The skilled masons who built pyramids now labor on farms, and those who tended the boat of the gods are yoked together in plowing. Men do not go on voyages today. What shall we do for cedar wood for our mummies, in coffins of which priests are buried, and with the oil of which men are embalmed? They come no longer. Everything is in ruins. Laughter is dead. If I only knew where God was, I would make offerings to him. Throughout this period of about 200 years,
Some, at least, must have dreamed of a better time awaiting them in the future. Another text written after this time, known as the Prophecy of Neferti, contains a prediction that a ruler would come who would end this time of strife. A king will come. He will take the white crown. He will wear the red crown. He will unite the two mighty lands. Rejoice ye people of his time. The Asiatics will fall to his sword, and the Libyans will fall to his flame. The rebels belong to his wrath, and the treacherous in heart belong to the awe of him. The man who would fulfill this prophecy, or rather, the man in whose reign the prophecy was more likely written, would reunite Egypt and usher in a new age of stability. His name was Nebepetre Mentuhotep II. Mentuhotep was a king in the city of Thebes in Upper Egypt. Sitting on the eastern bank of the Nile, about 800 kilometers from the Mediterranean, Thebes is one of the sunniest and driest cities in the world. It had been the capital of its own province throughout the Old Kingdom, but had always been something of a backwater, and somewhat influenced by the African culture of Nubia. But during the more than a century of chaos that surrounded the collapse of the Old Kingdom, Thebes slowly grew to become the capital of the south, and its kings began referring to themselves as the Great Overlord of Upper Egypt. It was a city where tightly packed rows of houses, granaries, and workshops clustered around the central temple to the god Amun, and its people clearly sought a break from the suffocating influence of the kings in Memphis. But in the north, near the traditional center of Egyptian power, an ambitious and ruthless rival was also amassing its forces. This was centered around the city of Henen-Nesut in Lower Egypt, in the verdant region between the River Nile and the Great Lake at Fayoum, a region that the desert Thebans dismissively called the Marshlands. This city would later be known as Heracleopolis, or the City of Hercules. For about a hundred years during this time of dissolution, Thebes and Henen-Nesut had fought bitter wars over small border regions, forts, and roads, but neither side could ever gain the upper hand. That was until the reign of the King of Thebes, Mentuhotep. He was named after the Theban god of war and came from a line of warlike kings. He clearly desired to bring this series of conflicts to a decisive conclusion and reunite the fractured kingdom of old. The final confrontation between north and south would be sparked by a rebellion in the city of Thinnes, once home to King Namer and which was now one of the vassals of Thebes. Delighted by this development, the northern power of Henen-Nesut seized the opportunity and marched south into the desert to capture the town. War soon raged across all Egypt. At one point, the northerners pushed south and captured the ancient sacred city of Abydos, and there unleashed a wave of destruction against its temples and palaces. One later text, known as the Instruction to Merikare, purports to be written by a king of northern Henen-Nesut who is racked with guilt for the destruction of this sacred city. Lo, a shameful deed occurred in my time. The province of These was ravaged. Though it happened through my doing, I learned it after it was done. There was retribution for what I had done, for it is evil to destroy. Beware of it. A blow is rebounding. paid by its like. To every action, there is a response. This response would come in the form of a thundering reprisal by the king of Thebes, Mentuhotep. He would march into the north and defeat the armies of Henen-Nesut. Next, he rounded on the northern capital, when he captured it, all of the funerary monuments of its kings were defaced and destroyed, perhaps suggesting a sacking of the city. Whatever the northerners had done to the sacred center of Abydos, it was clearly visited upon them and their city tenfold. Mentuhotep now swept through northern Egypt and the provincial governors saw the writing on the wall and swore fealty to him. After nearly two centuries of dissolution, the two halves of Egypt were once again united. The period that followed, known as the Middle Kingdom of Egypt, would last for around 300 years. But it has not left an impressive archaeological record. Compared to the towering pyramids of the Old Kingdom and the architectural magnificence of the later New Kingdom, it stands out as something of a dull time for grand monument construction. But it did experience a flourishing in another area, that is, in the realm of Egyptian literature. One famous story written around this time is called the Tale of Sinuhe. It narrates the life of a man who traveled north into Palestine and beyond, but who eventually becomes homesick and decides to return to Egypt. Another collection of stories was written around this time, a kind of ancient Arabian knights known as the Tales of Wonder. It relates a number of fantastical stories, imagining that they were told to the great pharaoh Khufu of the Old Kingdom by his three sons. Another story written during the Middle Kingdom is known as the Tale of the Shipwrecked Sailor, a kind of ancient gulliver's travels. It is remarkable for its innovative structure, a tale within a tale about a sailor shipwrecked in the Mediterranean who finds himself on an island ruled by a gigantic serpent. A storm came up with us on the open sea and no chance for us to reach harbor. The wind grew sharp and made a constant moaning and there were hungry 14 foot high waves. A piece of wood of some sort hit me and then the ship was dead. Of all those fine men, not a one survived. Then, I was carried to a desert island by a swell of the great green sea. The man speaks with the great serpent who tells him a sad story of his own, that his whole family was killed when a star fell to earth. The serpent tells the man not to fear, that a ship will eventually pass by the island and rescue him, and reassures him that he will soon have a great story to tell. Now, you are going to spend one month and then another until you finish four months on this island. Then, a ship will come from Egypt with sailors in it whom you know that you may go with them toward home and die in your own city. What joy for one who lives to tell the things he has been through when the suffering is over. Finally, the predicted ship arrives and the man is rescued. the ship arrived just as he had foretold. I climbed a lofty tree and recognized the sailors in the ship and went running to report it. Then I descended to the shore near where the ship was. I hailed the crew and offered thanks beside the sea to the Lord of the Isle, and those on board did likewise. We have examples of myths and legends written before this time and religious texts, but this is not the story of some bygone king or the actions of the gods. It's a story about an ordinary man in a fantastical situation, told seemingly just for the entertainment value of telling a story, and for that reason, it is possibly the first true piece of literature. It was likely written around the year 1900 BC and is therefore nearly 4,000 years old. The lives of Egypt's pharaohs take up so much of the usual discussion of its history, partly because they are the ones who commissioned the inscriptions, the monuments, and the statues. But as the Middle Kingdom's flourishing of literature continued, we get more and more of a sense of what life was like for ordinary people in the Nile Valley. One text of this period, known as the Papyrus Lansing, gives a fascinating insight into the lives of Egypt's common people. It is written as a piece of rhetoric by a master scribe to one of his pupils, attempting to convince him to become a scribe in turn. From this, we get a wonderful impression of all the ways that people could make their living in the land of Egypt. Young fellow, writing to him who knows it is more profitable than any profession. It is pleasanter than bread and beer, than clothing, than oil. Yes, it is more precious than an inheritance in Egypt, than a tomb in the West. Look for thyself with your own eye. Here, all the professions are set before you. The washerman spends the whole day going up and down. Every limb of his is a weary, whitening the clothes of his neighbors every day. The potter is smeared with mud, like a man in mourning. His hands and feet are full of clay. He is like one who lives in the bog. The cobbler mixes tanning lotions. His odor is marked. His hands are red with dye, like one who is smeared with his blood. The florist makes bouquets and makes the wine jar stands beautiful. He spends a night of toil, sweating like one on whose body the sun is shining. The merchants fare downstream and upstream and are as busy as can be, carrying wares from one town to another and supplying him that hath not. If thou hast any sense, be a scribe. Whether or not daily life was truly that bad for all these other workers, we can't tell, because of course, none of them wrote down how they felt. Most of Egypt's people were peasant farmers, and even when they practiced these other professions, they likely engaged in some farming too. These peasants did not own the land they worked and were required to give most of the food they produced to the crown or to their local temple. To supplement their diets, most houses kept private kitchen gardens too, which the women would tend while the men went out to the fields. Egyptian women were also responsible for baking the bread they ate every day. Bread in Egypt was made primarily with emmer wheat. Dough was often pressed into clay moulds and baked. At times, people got creative, baking bread in spirals like a cinnamon swirl, and using shaped moulds to bake loaves in the form of animals. Those who could afford it
also baked cakes and pastries out of the finest flour, sweetened with dates and honey. Alongside their bread, Egyptians ate a varied diet including garlic and spring onions, lettuce, celery, cucumbers, gourds, and melons. They supplemented these with high protein beans and pulses like lentils and chickpeas, and a kind of edible tuber known as a tiger nut that grows at the base of wetland sedges. All of this was cooked in olive oil, at least from the time the pyramids were built. At times, they would also eat meat, primarily beef, lamb, pork, and goat, as well as quail, pigeon, duck, geese, and partridge. Mice were even eaten at times and even hedgehogs. The Egyptians cooked these spiky creatures by wrapping them in wet clay and baking them in it. When the clay was cracked open afterwards, it took the hedgehog's spines with it. The Egyptians also made cheese and even foie gras made from force-feeding geese. One text written by a scribe to the queen Nefertari urges people to share with others the food they have. Do not eat bread while another stands by without extending your hand to him. As to food, it is here always. It is man who does not last. One man is rich, another is poor, but food remains for him who shares it. Beer was exceptionally popular in Egypt and people consumed it daily. As a result, breweries were important centers of industry. Beer was thought to have been given to Egypt by the goddess Hathor, the goddess of beauty, music, and dancing, and breweries were watched over by the goddess Tenenet. So, fittingly, many beer factories were run by women. Some of these were enormous and were capable of brewing more than a million liters a year. They used large pottery vats propped up on mud bricks over crackling fires, and inside these they heated barley and water, then left the mixture to ferment before flavoring the brew with honey and syrups made of dates and other fruit. There was even one annual festival called the Tek Festival that would become known as the Festival of Drunkenness. During this fiesta, Egyptians would drink as much beer as they could and then fall asleep together in a large hall. They would then be awoken all together by the loud beating of drums. It was said that in the moment just after waking, some of them would meet the goddess Hathor herself. Egypt was one of the most stable and prosperous agricultural societies in the ancient world, but it was a society built entirely on the collection and storage of grain. As a result, there was one ever-present danger, that was the presence of mice and rats. Grain was stored in large circular granaries within the towns, shaped like beehives, and freshly harvested wheat or barley was poured in through a hole in the top to be preserved in the hot, dry air. When grain was needed for bread making or beer brewing, it was taken from a small door in the bottom of these granaries. But if mice got into this storage or even ate the grain while it was still in the fields, then thousands of hours of work could be wasted and people might even starve. But thankfully, Egyptians were able to rely on one particular set of allies. That was the domestic cat. There were two major breeds of wild cat native to Egypt, the jungle cat or Felis Chaus, and the African wild cat, Felis Silvestris Libica. Of these, the African wild cat had something of a calmer temperament and so was most commonly bred as a pet. With evidence of their domestication in Egypt,
from at least 5,000 years ago. These cats were kept around Egyptian settlements for their obvious utility, both in controlling mice and with their almost supernatural reflexes for their ability to kill venomous snakes. But it's clear that the Egyptians also enjoyed their company and even loved them. Some particularly beloved pets were buried with tiny offerings intended to serve them well in the cat afterlife. The Greek writer Diodorus of Sicily recalls seeing Egyptians performing burial ceremonies for their cats. When one of these animals dies, they wrap it in fine linen and then, wailing and beating their breasts, carry it off to be embalmed. After it has been treated with seed oil and such spices as have the quality of imparting a pleasant odor and of preserving the body for a long time, they lay it away in a consecrated tomb. While the earliest domestication of the house cat took place elsewhere in the Fertile Crescent, it was in Egypt that it accelerated dramatically. As cats got used to their new survival niche, they in turn began to adapt. They largely lost their original camouflage coatings, became smaller, and even developed new ways of signaling to their human patrons with soft, insistent cries modulated to similar frequencies as a human baby. Fittingly, the Egyptian word for cat was mew. Over time, this adoration of their feline companions seems to have become a religious reverence, too. With their ease and grace, cats in Egypt were associated with femininity, and paintings in tombs often show the household dog sitting below a man's chair while a cat sits under the woman's chair. One goddess named Bastet would soon become revered and she manifested as a woman with the head of a house cat. Bastet became a god of fertility and women would appeal to her during times of childbirth and pregnancy. Diodorus later records seeing an Egyptian festival during which cats were ritually fed. For the cats, they break up bread into milk and calling them with a clucking sound set it before them, or else they cut up fish caught in the Nile and feed the flesh to them raw. All who meet these animals fall down before them and render them with honor. The Egyptians were also fiercely protective of their feline companions, as Diodorus recounts. Whoever kills a cat, whether intentionally or unintentionally, he is certainly put to death. For common people gathering crowds and deal with the perpetrator most cruelly, sometimes doing this without waiting for a trial. The worship and veneration of cats would continue throughout all the thousands of years of ancient Egyptian history. For the cats, it is perhaps something that they have never quite forgotten. The Middle Kingdom was not just a time of entertainment and pleasure. With the mania for pyramid building somewhat subsided, certain pharaohs engaged in large-scale construction projects to strengthen and develop the empire. One king spent much of his life on a vast irrigation project around the oasis at Fayyum, determined to turn it into a productive swathe of farmland. Another built a large series of defensive walls in the Nile Delta, hemming Egypt off from the people of the wider Middle East whom the Egyptians called Asiatics. These people were often depicted in their paintings with lighter, more yellowish skin than the Egyptians and were held in general contempt as uncivilized barbarians. The Egyptians soon began pushing their sphere of influence into this area, expanding their territory north along the Mediterranean coast and into Palestine. They crossed the Sinai Desert and subjugated the Phoenician city of Byblos. Then, they turned their attention south to Eastern Africa, what the Egyptians called the Haram. lands, the lands of the Nubians. Like the light-skinned Asiatics in the north, the Egyptians considered the southern Nubians different to them and usually depicted them with darker skin than Egyptians and more typically African features. At this time, these kingdoms were relatively underdeveloped and were easy prey for an aggressive and expansionist Egypt. We've already seen that the first cataract of the Nile was at Aswan, where the granite bedrock forced the water into a series of rushing whitewater rapids. If an ancient Egyptian traveled upriver beyond Aswan and into the horizon lands, they would encounter five more major cataracts of the Nile.