Mehmed asked Orban if he could build a cannon that would bring down the Theodosian walls of Constantinople, and Orban gave this reply. I can cast a cannon of bronze with the capacity of the stone you want. I have examined the walls of the city in great detail. I can shatter to dust not only these walls with the stones from my gun, but the very walls of Babylon itself. The young sultan was impressed and he gave Orban everything he asked for. Three months later, the monster cannon was completed and Orban gave it its name, Basilica. Basilica was one of the largest guns ever built. It was over 10 meters long and weighed so much that it had to be dragged to the walls of Constantinople by a team of 60 oxen and 400 men, leveling the land ahead of it and building bridges over ditches and rivers. The cannon edged towards the city at a rate of only four kilometers a day. Slowly but surely, inch by inch, the death of Constantinople was nearing. One of the most remarkable documents to survive from this time is the journal of a Venetian surgeon named Niccolo Barbaro who lived in Constantinople. It gives us an incredibly vivid account of the events of the days that followed. In this journal, Barbaro writes about the day that the full might of the Ottoman army appeared outside the walls of Constantinople. On the fifth month of April, one hour after daybreak, Mahomet Bey came before Constantinople with about 160,000 men and encamped about two and a half miles from the walls of the city. When the sultan arrived at the city with his army and his enormous cannons, he began the siege with a fearsome bombardment. The great cannon basilica was horrifically inaccurate but when it landed a hit, the destruction it caused was immense. Iron cannonballs had yet to be developed and so this cannon hurled smooth balls of marble or granite. each weighing three-quarters of a ton, walls of Constantinople. Due to the immense amount of explosives used in each firing, the cannon had to be cooled with olive oil between shots. We can imagine the sweating workmen toiling around this bronze monster, the air wavering above its superheated sides, the smell of sizzling oil spattering from it, and the sharp smell of gunpowder in the air as each enormous plume of smoke burst from its gaping mouth, and the sound of its firing echoed off the walls of the city like a thunderclap. Inside the city, the psychological toll of this gun must have been immense. It could only be fired three times a day since it had to be cooled between each shot to prevent the barrel from cracking. But when the thunder of its explosions sounded, the citizens of Constantinople have ducked down and looked up to their ancient walls in fear to see if they would hold. The Venetian Niccolo Barbaro remembers the frantic attempts to repair the walls as the bombardment rained down on the city. The Venetians set about making good and strong repairs where they were needed at the broken walls. These repairs were made with barrels filled with stones and earth, and behind them there was made a very wide ditch with a dam at the end of it which was covered with strips of vine and other layers of branches drenched with water to make them solid so that it was as strong as the wall had been. The bombardment of the city went on for 48 days with repeated attempts by the Turks to storm the walls. But even under the fearsome cannon fire and vastly outnumbered, the walls of Constantinople held. Barbaro's diary recounts the fierce fighting that took place. They found the Turks coming right up under the walls and seeking battle, particularly the Janissaries. When one or two of them were killed, at once more Turks came and took away the dead ones, without caring how near they came to the city walls. Our men shot at them with guns and crossbows aiming at the Turk who was carrying away his dead countrymen, and both of them would fall to the ground dead. And then there came other Turks and took them away, none fearing death, but being willing to let ten of themselves be killed rather than suffer the shame of leaving a single Turkish corpse by the walls. In their moment of darkness, the Byzantines looked to their ancient heritage. The Emperor Constantine XI is said to have addressed his soldiers defending the walls with the following cry. Hurl your javelins and arrows against them so that they know that they are fighting with the descendants of the Greeks and the Romans. The siege of Constantinople is one of those historical events that has been told and retold countless times, and its events have passed into legend. The fighting on the water, the defenders waiting for the Venetian reinforcements that never came, the Turkish sappers digging tunnels under the walls, and the Byzantines discovering them, the Sultan Mehmed's daring surprise plan to carry his boats over the land, rolling them on wooden rollers and into the waters of the Golden Horn past its long chain. The events of the siege read like a Hollywood movie, but I think this story has been told enough times by other people. I want to focus here on what it must have felt like to be a normal person living in the city of Constantinople during this siege, how it must have felt to watch this city finally come apart from the inside. During the siege, prayers were held daily in the Hagia Sophia, the austere, somber chanting of the Byzantine monks soaring out over the imprisoned people of the city. The rolling thunder of cannon fire would have sounded outside the walls like a storm, the firecracker sounds of the smaller guns popping in the distance, and the booming thunder of the larger bombards. When the wind blew towards the city, there must have been a constant smell of gunpowder in the streets from the Turkish capital. cannons camped far outside the walls. Barbaro notes the growing shortages in the city. The city was in great distress because of a growing lack of provisions, particularly of bread, wine, and other things necessary to sustain life. As the mood inside the city darkened and panic began to set in, Barbaro remembers the appearance of ominous signs in the sky overhead. On this same day, the 22nd of May, there appeared a sign in the sky which was to tell Constantine, the worthy emperor of Constantinople, that his proud empire was about to come to an end. At the first hour after sunset the moon rose. It rose as if it were no more than a three-day moon, with only a little of it showing, although the air was clear and unclouded, pure as crystal. The moon stayed in this form for about four hours and gradually increased to a full circle so that at the sixth hour of the night it was fully formed. When we Christians and the pagans had seen this marvellous sign, the emperor of Constantinople was greatly afraid, and so were all his nobles, because the Greeks had a prophecy which said that Constantinople would never fall until the full moon should give a sign. And panic wasn't confined to the common people of the city. Barbaro notes the increasing despair of the Byzantine emperor and his grief at being left to fight alone by his western allies. At this point, the most serene emperor began to weep bitterly for grief, because the Venetians had not sent help, and when the emperor saw this, he decided to put himself in the hands of our most merciful Lord Jesus Christ and of his mother, Madonna Saint Mary, and of Saint Constantine, defender of his city, for them to guard it. As the walls were pounded into rubble by the enormous Turkish guns, panic began to spread among the commanders of the army too, a panic that became contagious and spread through all the city's people. Zuan Zustignan, that Genoese of Genoa, decided to abandon his post and fled to his ship which was lying at the boom. The emperor had made this Zuan Zustignan captain of his forces and as he fled, he went through the city crying, the Turks have got into the city. As despair set in in the streets of Constantinople, it was matched by signs of celebration that could be seen in the Turkish camp outside the walls, whose lights were visible at night to the sentries on the walls. The Turks set fires blazing brightly through the whole of their camp. Every tent in their camp lit two fires of great size and the light from them was so strong that it seemed as if it were day. These fires burned until midnight and the sultan had them lit in his camp to encourage his men because the time was coming for the destruction of the city. And finally, the time had come. The final assault on the city began and the Turkish soldiers burst over the walls. Barbaro recalls the sound and fury of the ensuing battle. At sunrise, the Turks entered the city near San Romano, where the walls had been razed to the ground by their cannon. After being driven back from the barbicans, the Turks again fired their great cannon and the pagans like hounds came on behind the smoke of the cannon, raging and pressing on each other like wild beasts, so that in the space of a quarter of an hour, there were more than 30,000 Turks inside the barbicans, with such cries that it seemed a very inferno and the shouting was heard as far away as Anatolia. Just like the soldiers of the fourth crusade two and a half centuries before, the Ottomans rampaged through the city and the bloodshed was tremendous. Around the city, the flags of Byzantium, those crescent moon and stars, were torn down and Ottoman flags were flown in their place. Hopelessness began to set in. sin among the citizens. All through the day the Turks made a great slaughter of Christians through the city. The blood flowed in the city like rainwater in the gutters after a sudden storm, and the corpses of Turks and Christians were thrown into the Dardanelles, where they floated out to sea like melons along a canal. No one could hear any news of the emperor, what he had been doing or whether he was dead or alive, but some said that his body had been seen among the corpses, and it was said that he had hanged himself at the moment when the Turks broke in at the San Romano gate. Finally the city was taken, and the Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror strode into the ruined streets victorious. It's said that when he stepped into the haunting ruins of the ancient palace of Bucolean, probably built by the emperor Theodosius in the 5th century, a thousand years before, Mehmed uttered two haunting lines by the famous Persian poet Firdusi, which encapsulate the melancholy ruin that must have spread before his eyes. The spider weaves the curtains in the palace of the Caesars. The owl calls the watches in the towers of Afrasyab. The Byzantine Empire had lasted for 1,123 years and 18 days. But now the great liturgy that echoed from the dome of the Hagia Sophia fell silent. After the fall of Constantinople, a number of Byzantine lords held on to the fragments of the empire for a few more years. But by 1461, they had all surrendered. Mehmed the Conqueror moved the capital of his empire to Constantinople and gave himself the title of Caesar. He also set about an ambitious project to restore the capital of Constantine, just as the ancient emperor had more than a millennia before. At the palace of Blakone, now crumbling and in ruins, he began a series of renovations, laying out magnificent gardens that the historian Cretobulus of Imbros recalls with awe. Around the palace, he laid out a circle of large and beautiful gardens, burgeoning with various fine plants, bringing forth fruits in season, flowing with abundant streams, cold, clear, and good to drink, studded with beautiful groves and meadows, resounding and chattering with flocks of singing birds. For the city's beleaguered inhabitants, the conquest of the city would be a trauma that they could never successfully heal from. The painful truth of their history was converted into legend, just as an oyster converts painful grains of sand into pearls. One such legend is of the priests who had been chanting in the Hagia Sophia when the city fell and who were killed by the rampaging soldiers. They had not been massacred, the legend says, and in fact, had melted by some miracle into the south wall of the sanctuary. One day when the city was back in Christian hands, they would return and take up their service at the point they had been interrupted. Another legend says that the last emperor of Byzantium hadn't perished in the battle for the city. In fact, he had been rescued by an angel and turned to stone. Somewhere in a cave below the Golden Horn, the marble emperor awaits to one day return in triumph. Meanwhile, the Turkish people settled in Byzantium and a great cultural shift took place in the city's population. But the imprint of Byzantium would leave just as indelible a mark on its conquerors as its conquerors left on it. Mehmed II actually claimed that the Ottoman Empire was a continuation of the Roman Empire, not an end to it. In his court, he gathered Italian artists, humanists, and Greek scholars and allowed the Byzantine church to continue functioning in the city. He collected in his palace a library which included works in Persian, Greek, and Latin, and even
invited a Venetian painter to come and its successors abandoned much of these efforts and any claim to the legacy of Rome, it's clear that at least for this emperor of the Ottomans Byzantium had left a deep impression on his soul. And the legacy of Byzantium left its mark too on the religion of Islam. While Mecca and Medina were its spiritual heart, Constantinople became its cultural heart. The crescent moon had been the symbol of Byzantium since as early as 670 BC in honor of the city's patron goddess Artemis. After the capture of Constantinople, Mehmed adopted it for his own banner. Over the centuries that followed, this crescent moon would become official standard of the Ottoman Empire and by the mid-20th century had become recognized as the symbol of Islam. As Constantinople fell, the city that had once accepted refugees from all corners of the world now sent its own people streaming across Europe. Wherever they went, Byzantine refugees brought with them the ancient learnings of the Greeks. While Aristotle had been known in Western Europe for centuries, now the Latins who welcomed the fleeing Byzantines were introduced to the writings of Demosthenes and Xenophon, Plato, Aeschylus, and the Iliad. The historian Edward Gibbon summarizes the seismic effect this had on the learning of Europeans. The restoration of the Greek letters in Italy was prosecuted by a series of emigrants who were destitute of fortune and endowed with learning. From the terror or oppression of the Turkish arms, the natives of Thessalonica and Constantinople escaped to a land of freedom, curiosity, and wealth and taught their native language in the schools of Florence and Rome. Those fleeing Byzantium would tutor scholars like the humanist philosopher Marsilio Ficino and the Italian poet Poliziano in Florence. The wealthy Medici family of Italy became patrons of one Byzantine lecturer, opening up the Platonic Academy of Florence. In this way, the fall of Byzantium laid the seeds of what would become the European Renaissance and as one age of history ended, another would begin. The fall of Byzantium disrupted long-established trade routes that joined Europe to Asia along the Silk Road. This seismic shift forced European traders to find new routes across the continent to the markets of India and China and the developing technology of sailing ships like the caravel became increasingly crucial. Only 35 years after the fall of Constantinople, in the year 1488, the Portuguese explorer Bartholomew Diaz rounded the southernmost Cape of Africa and opened up the sea route to India. Only four years after that, the explorer Christopher Columbus would land in the Bahamas and open up the exploration of the New World. Columbus was inspired to undertake his voyage, in part because of the ancient text known as the Geographia, written by the ancient Greek philosopher Claudius Ptolemy. This text was one of those that was preserved in the libraries of Byzantium and which was brought to Western Europe after its fall. Although governed by different rulers under a different religion, Byzantium would continue to welcome the tired and huddled masses of the world to shelter behind its great walls. In the year 1492, the same year that Columbus discovered Hispaniola, the European antisemitism that had been unleashed by the first crusade reached a fever pitch. All the Jews of Spain were expelled by the Royal Alhambra Decree and the Sultan Bayezid II, the oldest son of Mehmed the Conqueror, himself now a man of 45 years old, dispatched the Ottoman navy to escort the Jews of Spain safely back to settle in his lands. For another generation at least, the city of Constantinople would once again earn the title that once was the capital of Constantinople. emblazoned its name in the European Queen of the Queens of Cities. Today, as unchanging and static, a relic of the past, they believed that the Byzantine Empire had played little part in the history of Europe except as an embarrassing fossil, a relic of a bygone age. The Turkish author Orhan Pamuk, in his book Istanbul, writes about how the memory of Byzantium has been lost. Like most Istanbul Turks, I had little interest in Byzantium as a child. I associated the word with spooky, bearded, black-robed Greek Orthodox priests, with the aqueducts that still ran through the city, with Hagia Sophia, and the red brick walls of old churches. To me, these were remnants of an age so distant that there was little need to know about it. As for the Byzantines, they had vanished into thin air, or so I'd been led to believe. No one told me that it was their grandchildren's grandchildren's grandchildren who now ran the shoe stores and haberdashery shops of Beoglu. Like Gautier, Pamuk writes movingly about the city of his childhood, a place where the crumbling ruins of the past rose out of the modern streets and the faded districts of Ottoman wood-paneled houses, all of it full of a strange and melancholy beauty. In Istanbul's poor neighborhoods, beauty resides entirely in the crumbling walls, in the grass, ivy, weeds, and trees I remember growing from the towers and walls of the castles. The beauty of a broken fountain, an old ramshackle mansion, the crumbling wall of an old mosque, the vines and plane trees intertwining to shade the old blackened walls of a wooden house. These sad, now vanished ruins gave Istanbul its soul. But to discover the city's soul and its ruins, to see these ruins as expressive of the city's essence, you must travel down a long, labyrinthine path strewn with historical accidents. Pamuk talks about the city's power to be seen through European and Turkish eyes, about how the city of strangers had now become a stranger to its own citizens. A crumbling wall, a wooden teke, condemned, abandoned, and now fallen into neglect. A fountain from whose spouts no water pours, a workshop in which nothing has been produced for 80 years, a collapsing building, a row of houses with crooked window casings. None of these things look beautiful to the people who live amongst them. To savor Istanbul's back streets, to appreciate the vines and trees that endow its ruins with accidental grace, you must, first and foremost, be a stranger to them. Today, the lonely ruins of the Theodosian walls of Constantinople still line the modern city of Istanbul, tracing their battered and crumbling route from the Sea of Marmara to the waters of the Golden Horn. They stand as a testament to the spirit of a city that once promised to protect all the people of the world and shelter them in its embrace. These walls serve as a testament to the power of the people who held the remnants of Rome together into a flourishing and stable empire, a wellspring of art and culture, and a repository of the knowledge of the past that would pass its wealth onto the generations that came after. They stand as a symbol of the empire that never truly died but lives on today, ingrained in the fabric of the cultures of both East and West, Europe and Asia, Christian and Muslim, reaching back down the ages to the time of the ancients. I want to end the episode with the lament written by the great Byzantine historian Niketas Koniates upon seeing the destruction of his city after its sacking by the Crusader army of 1204. Today, this lament stands as one of the most moving pieces of writing ever written about a lost and destroyed city, a wail of sorrow that speaks down to us through the ages. As you listen, try to imagine what it would have been like to be a citizen of Constantinople in the final days of its empire. Imagine what it would feel like to walk the abandoned streets of Constantine's city with its roof beams fallen in and olive trees growing among the patches of wasteland that now spread out between its sparse inhabited zones.