Imagine what it must have felt like to walk its empty marketplaces and hollowed-out palaces, to run your hand along its ancient stones and see the sunlight fall on its faded murals, its glittering golden icons, and the earth-red tiles of its rooftops. Imagine seeing the sun set on the final days of Rome, as the light fades over the Golden Horn and the Sea of Marmara, over the rippling waters of the Bosporus, and for the final time, on the dying empire of Byzantium. City Fortified, City of the Great King, Tabernacle of the Most High, Praise and Song of His Servants and Beloved Refuge for Strangers, Queen of the Queens of Cities, Song of Songs and Splendour of Splendours and the Rarest Vision of the Rare Wonders of the World. Who is it that has torn us away from you like darling children from their adoring mother? What shall become of us? Where shall we go? What consolation shall we find in our nakedness, torn from your bosom as from a mother's womb? When shall we look on you, not as you now are, a plain of desolation and a valley of weeping, trampled by armies and despised and rejected, but exalted and restored, revered by those who humbled you and provoked you? As we left the city behind, I threw myself, just as I was, on the ground and reproached the walls. If what you were built to protect is no more, for what purpose do you still stand? We went forth, weeping and casting our lamentations like seeds. Thank you once again for listening to the Fall of Civilizations podcast. I'd like to thank my voice actors for this episode, Annie Kelly, Cleo Madeline, Joey L and Nicholas Roxon. Reading the diary of Niccolo Barbaro was David Kelly from the YouTube channel Voices of the Past. He'll be releasing a full reading of that source in the near future and you can find it on Voices of the Past soon. Special thanks also go to the author and historian Peter Sandam for agreeing to act as a special consultant on this episode. We were joined on this episode by the choir from the Saint Sophia Greek Orthodox Cathedral in London, bringing us the incredible sound of Byzantine chanting. The members of the choir were Michael Giorgio, Alexandros Gikas, Matthew Tomko, and Stephanos Tomiades. We were also joined by musicians playing a number of traditional instruments to bring us the authentic sound of Byzantium, on vocals Monica Lucia Madas, also known as Monuca, on the Byzantine lyre, Alexandros Koustas, and on the canun, Konstantinos Glynos. Theophilos Lais was playing the Cretan lyre and Dario Papa Vassiliou was on the Greek santur. If you enjoyed these traditional performances, they will be available to download for all Patreon subscribers. As some of you may know already, Fall of Civilizations now has a visual accompaniment which we're calling Fall of Civilizations TV. available now on YouTube. These videos bring maps, artwork, drone photography, and reenactments to the screen alongside the usual stories, all in glittering 4K resolution. I know many of you like to return to old episodes and I hope this brings something new to the experience. As a thank you for supporting the show, all Patreon subscribers will be able to watch these video episodes completely ad-free. As a final note, if you enjoyed the discussion of Byzantine cuisine on this episode, you may enjoy the podcast The Delicious Legacy by Thomas Tynes. Tom has been a part of the Fall of Civilizations team from the beginning and now has his own show, looking at the history of food in the ancient world. He'll have a special episode coming soon, looking at the food culture of Byzantium. If that sounds like your thing, go check out his show, The Delicious Legacy, today. I love to hear your thoughts and responses on Twitter, so please come and tell me what you thought. You can follow me at Paul M. M. Cooper. If you'd like updates about the podcast, announcements about new episodes, as well as images, maps, and reading suggestions, you can follow the podcast at fallofcivpod, with underscores separating the words. This podcast can only keep going with the support of our generous subscribers on Patreon. You keep me running, you help me cover my costs, and you help to keep the podcast ad-free. You also let me dedicate more time to researching, writing, recording, and editing to get the episodes out to you faster and bring as much life and detail to them as possible. I want to thank all my subscribers for making this happen. If you enjoyed this episode, please consider heading on to patreon.com forward slash fallofcivilizations underscore podcast, or just google Fall of Civilizations Patreon, that's P-A-T-R-E-O-N, to contribute something and help keep this podcast running. For now, all the best, and thanks for listening.