In the year 1852, the French writer and translator Théophile Gautier made a journey to the city then known as Istanbul, the capital of the Ottoman Empire. Thanks to the new technology of the steamship that now criss-crossed the Mediterranean, he made the journey from Paris in just under 11 days. Gautier stayed in the city for nearly three months and during that time he wrote a book full of his observations. As a young man, Gautier had dreamed of becoming a painter and he'd spent much of his life as an art critic, and so his descriptions of the city of Istanbul during this time are always infused with the language of art, as though the city were a painting he was appraising. The harbour crowded with ships of all nations and rippled by caiques gliding about in every direction, and above all, the wonderful panorama of Constantinople itself displayed upon the opposite shore. This view is so strangely beautiful that it is hard to credit its reality or to believe that it is anything but one of those theatrical scenes prepared to illustrate some eastern fairy tale, and bathed by the fancy of the painter and the brilliancy of the gas lights in a radiance purely celestial. Gautier walked the streets of Istanbul for weeks, visiting its markets and cemeteries, wandering down the narrow alleys and crumbling cobbled boulevards, and all the time writing about what he saw. Everywhere he went, he became increasingly aware of the vanished history of this ancient city. While the Ottoman Turks who lived there increasingly referred to their city by the name Istanbul, Gautier, along with much of the rest of Europe, knew it by a different, much older name. That name was Constantinople, and it was a city that had been at the heart of another very different empire, one that had been the foremost power in Europe for centuries. This was a power known as the Byzantine Empire, or more simply, as Byzantium. Byzantium had its beginning as the eastern half of the Roman Empire. While the west of that empire fell, the east remained. It lasted for another thousand years after what people commonly think of as the fall of Rome. It stood and endured, and in its great libraries, it preserved and protected the knowledge of the ancients. But the ruins of that great city now littered the streets of Istanbul. Of all the ruins that Gautier visited, none affected him so deeply as the site of the Great Walls of Constantinople, which had once been legendary around the world. We would have gone along the whole outer extent of these ancient walls of Byzantium had we not been too much fatigued. I do not suppose that there is in the world a ride more austerely melancholy than upon this road, which extends for nearly a league between a cemetery and a mass of ruins. The ramparts, composed of two lines of wall flanked with square towers, have at their base a large moat, at present cultivated throughout, which is again surrounded by a stone parapet forming, in fact, three lines of fortification. These are the walls of Constantine, such as have been left of them after time, sieges and earthquakes have done their worst upon them. Gautier writes movingly about the masses of overgrown vegetation now growing on the ancient walls, fig trees sprouting from their towers, and vines and grasses bursting from the cracks in the masonry. Here and there, a gigantic crevice severed a tower from top to bottom. Farther on, a massive wall had fallen into the moat, but where the masonry was wanting, the elements had supplied earth and seed. A shrub had supplied the place of a missing battlement, and grown into a tree, the thousand tendrils of parasitical plants had sustained the stone which upheld it. otherwise would have fallen. The roots of line of walls raised to the sky, its battered profile draped with ivy and gilded by time. The whole haunting scene seemed like something out of a dream or a magical tale, as the weight of the city's history seemed to weigh down on him. It was difficult to believe that a living city lay behind the defunct ramparts which hid Constantinople from our view. It had been easier to believe oneself near some of those cities of the Arabian legends, all the inhabitants of which had been, by some magical process, turned into stone. As he walked the length of those walls under the soft Istanbul sun, Gautier must have asked himself, how could the mighty walls of such a fortress city ever have fallen? How could a city that had once been at the center of the world now be home to such a scattering of rubble and ruin? What in all the world had happened to the great legacy of Byzantium? My name's Paul Cooper and you're listening to the Fall of Civilizations podcast. Each episode, I look at a civilization of the past that rose to glory and then collapsed into the ashes of history. I want to ask, what did they have in common? What led to their fall and what did it feel like to be a person alive at the time who witnessed the end of their world? In this episode, I want to look at one of history's most remarkable stories of survival. That's the thousand-year epic of the Byzantine Empire. I want to explore how this civilization suffered the loss of its western half and continued the unbroken legacy of Rome right through the Middle Ages. I want to examine how it formed a bridge between two continents and two ages, before ultimately being crushed between them both. I want to tell the story of how it was that the impregnable walls of Constantinople were finally brought crashing to the ground. Six million years ago, the Mediterranean Sea was a very different place to the cool, dark waters we know today. In those days, our ape-like ancestors hadn't even begun to walk on two legs. But if you were able to go back and see that time, stand on the shores of Greece or Italy, Turkey or North Africa, all you would see before you would be a hellish, dead landscape. The land beneath would drop away for 1,500 meters into a rolling desert of bleak salt flats, broken by lakes of water so salty that if you tried to swim in them, you would float on the surface. For more than 600,000 years, this deep depression in the land had been cut off from the Atlantic Ocean by the movement of the earth's plates. Over the millennia, the seawater that had once filled it had evaporated away, leaving only this harsh, salty land where nothing would grow. But this was all about to change in the most dramatic and apocalyptic way imaginable. This vast, deep basin was separated from the Atlantic Ocean by a thin strip of land only 60 kilometers wide, joining the landmasses of what is today Spain and Morocco. Beyond that, the enormous weight of all the world's water heaved and rocked. As 600 millennia passed by, those Atlantic waves ate away at that narrow strip of rock. The ocean waters ground down those cliffs until this strip of land was only 30 kilometers thick, 15 kilometers, then 5 kilometers. Then, at some point around 5.3 million years ago, this narrow gate of rock burst apart and the Atlantic Ocean was unleashed into Europe. What followed must have been one of the most impressive and terrifying sights that has ever occurred on Earth. The world's ocean burst into the Mediterranean and thundered in a raging torrent down a series of waterfalls that dropped for more than a kilometer. This channel is thought to have carried more than 200 billion liters of seawater every second or as much water as a thousand Amazon rivers, reaching speeds of up to 90 miles an hour. The waters of the Mediterranean rose as much as 10 meters a day to create a sea 4,000 kilometers end-to-end, or enough to cover the whole of North America from California to North Virginia. This process took perhaps as much as three years, but some researchers believe it could have taken only a few months. The force of these thundering waters caused earthquakes and landslides that can be seen in the geological record. These triggered mega-tsunamis more than a hundred meters high, or enough to completely swallow a 30-story building. This deluge is known today as the Zanclean Flood, and it's in this violence that the peaceful sea we call the Mediterranean was formed. This was a body of water quite unlike anywhere else on earth, a vast inland sea now joined to the open ocean by a narrow channel only 8 kilometers across at the Straits of Gibraltar. Europe and Africa were now two separate landmasses, and the formation of this sea would have an immense impact on the shape and history of this region. Geological fragments found in the Apidema Cave in Greece show that modern humans arrived at the Mediterranean around 200,000 years ago, spreading out from Africa along its eastern coast. These early arrivals were initially outcompeted by Neanderthals, a species of archaic humans well-adapted to life in the cold climate of Europe. But over the next hundred millennia, modern humans spread out of Africa in ever-greater numbers. They gradually pushed the Neanderthals out into the fringes of Europe, and ultimately to extinction. When the last ice age ended, the climate of Europe warmed. The glaciers that had covered much of its northern regions disappeared, and humans spread all the way around this vast inland sea. Ice ages rose and fell here through the Bronze Age, but from about the year 530 BC, one city on the shore of this sea had been steadily growing in size and influence. It sat on a temperate peninsula jutting out into the Mediterranean, and its people referred to its waters as Mare Magnum, or the Great Sea. This city was called Rome, and it would build an empire that would last in some form for more than 2,000 years. Rome succeeded because it excelled at organization, mass production, and military expansion. By the year 220 BC, its armies, armed with iron weapons and covering their bodies with iron chainmail or scales, had conquered all of the peninsula of Italy and the islands of Sicily, Corsica, and Sardinia. By 140 BC, they had spilled out into the Iberian Peninsula, what is now Spain, and crossed the sea to conquer the ancient cities of Greece. The Romans found a way of expanding their territory that was financially self-sustaining. As more peoples were conquered, they provided the economic base for even further expansion. In 167 BC, the Romans captured the Macedonian treasury, and as a result, they were able to virtually abolish taxes in Rome. When they conquered Pergamon in the year 130 AD, their state budget doubled, and it nearly doubled again after the conquest of Syria. during this time seemed as inevitable as the rushing torrents of water that had once poured through the Straits of Gibraltar. By the year 70 AD, the entire Mediterranean had been completely surrounded by its vast empire. Rome now stretched from the snowy hills of Scotland in the north to the rolling sand dunes of the Sahara in the south, from the stony shore of the Atlantic in the west to the deserts of Arabia in the east. The Romans and their subject peoples built roads and postal stations, scattering their empire with public baths and theaters, and ushering in a new age of technological development. But they also ruthlessly exploited the lands they conquered and exterminated any who resisted them with extreme cruelty. In the second century, five great emperors ruled, among them the emperors Trajan, Hadrian, and Marcus Aurelius. While wars went on at Rome's borders, a period of peace and prosperity reigned within its lands. But this age of relative peace wasn't to last, and the first signs of this empire crumbling came in the form of a devastating plague. In the winter of the year 165, Rome was at war with the Parthian Empire, a power centered in ancient Iran. Roman troops were besieging the Parthian city of Seleucia, close to modern city of Baghdad, when they first began to experience strange symptoms. The Greek physician Galen describes these frightening occurrences. On the ninth day, a young man had a slight cough. On the tenth day, the cough became stronger and with it he brought up scabs. After having quitar for many days, first with a cough, he brought up a little bright, fresh blood, and afterwards even part of the membrane which lines the artery and rises through the larynx to the mouth. This terrifying new illness spread rapidly through the troops. We don't know exactly what this plague was, but by its description, it may have been smallpox, possibly combined with a simultaneous outbreak of measles. Whatever it was, the plague quickly spread up the rivers of Mesopotamia. In the city of Amida, where the Romans were trying to fight off a Parthian siege, the Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus describes the horrific scenes. In the city, where the number of the corpses scattered over the streets was too great for anyone to perform the funeral rites over them, a pestilence was soon added to the other calamities of the citizens, the carcasses becoming full of worms and corruption from the evaporation caused by the heat and the various diseases of the people. Unable to fight both the Parthians and the disease, these Roman soldiers soon returned home. But they would unwittingly lead that invisible enemy right into the heart of the empire. The plague soon spread among the Roman soldiers, stationed among the foggy pine forests on the Rhine River, and then spread south along trade routes, finally reaching the densely packed metropolis of Rome. The Assyrian writer Lucian of Samosata writes about the houses of Rome standing empty with magical symbols and spells painted on their doors to ward off the evil that stalked the city streets. The records of the Han Dynasty in China also record a period of plague breaking out around the same time, suggesting a worldwide pandemic of deadly proportions. This outbreak, known to history as the Antonine Plague, is thought to have killed somewhere in the region of two percent of the empire's population, or around two million people. But in the worst-affected areas, mortality seems to have reached 30 or 40 percent. This weakened the empire at a crucial time in its history. Industries like trade by sea were utterly devastated, and the Roman military was critically weakened. As the plague reached its height, Rome's political world fell apart, too. As the dead littered its streets, the violent
and selfish Emperor Commodus was crowned, and the long history of Rome's decline began. Soon, rival generals fought viciously over who would rule, burning cities to the ground and expending the empire's energy in pointless, self-destructive wars. By the end of the third century, the vast Mediterranean empire could no longer be ruled from the declining city that had given birth to it. Rome was crippled by corruption and its people increasingly suffered from a disease that the Romans believed was caused by bad air, or mal aria in Latin, which we know today as malaria. In a desperate bid to get the empire back on course and end the civil wars, in the year 285, the Emperor Diocletian ordered that Rome's territory be split almost exactly in two. Western Europe and Western North Africa would form the western half of the empire, with its capital at Mediolanum or modern Milan. Meanwhile, the eastern regions, including the modern territories of Greece, Turkey, Syria, Israel, and Egypt, would pass to a new entity which today we call the Eastern Roman Empire. Both halves of the empire would be governed by two rulers each, creating a system known as the Tetrarchy, or the Rule of Four. It was thought that this division of power would finally end the brutal civil wars that had hollowed out the empire from within, but this would not turn out to be the case. The Tetrarchy soon fell apart, and civil war once more rocked the empire, a devastating 20-year conflict that saw the Emperor Constantine fight with his rivals over who would rule. During these wars, Constantine made the remarkable decision to convert to Christianity. This was a young religion based around the worship of a Jewish rebel protesting against the Roman occupation of Jerusalem, and this young faith had long faced brutal repression by Roman authorities. Constantine beat back his rivals and once more united the divided empire, ruling over it as the sole emperor and instating Christianity as its official religion. Constantine was also to embark on what to some must have seemed like an even more remarkable decision. Constantine decided to construct a new capital in the east. He considered various options but ultimately settled on a city that sat at the point right where Europe and Asia met, a small Greek trading city in the far east of the Mediterranean. This was a city known to the Greeks as Byzantion, but the Latin Constantine would have called it by the name we recognize today, Byzantium. The vast Zanclean flood that filled the Mediterranean wasn't the only great inundation to rock this region in prehistory. In fact, on the eastern shore of that sea, around what is now Turkey, another very similar event would take place, on a smaller scale but still no less dramatic. Around seven and a half thousand years ago, it's believed that the waters of the Mediterranean were themselves pushing up against another range of cliffs that walled off a narrow valley known as the Bosphorus. Beyond this barrier was another depression in the land, filled with a large freshwater lake. As the Ice Age ended and the glaciers melted, global sea levels rose, and perhaps aided by the frequent earthquakes in this region, the dam holding back the seas once again broke and the waters of the Mediterranean spilled through the valley of the Bosphorus in vast and unstoppable quantities. If this hypothesis is correct, it's thought that up to 50 cubic kilometers of water poured over this ledge each day, or 200 times the flow of the Niagara Falls. The lands beyond filled with salty seawater, flooding an area of a hundred thousand square kilometers, or about the size of Cuba. It's thought that Stone Age people would have witnessed this flood. flood, and it must have been a terrifying sight, one that they would tell their children about, and their children's children. In fact, along with the flooding of the Persian Gulf around the same time, this event has been proposed as one source for the biblical story of Noah's flood. This body of water would become known as the Black Sea. Today, its shores belong to the nations of Russia, Ukraine, Georgia, Bulgaria, Romania, and Turkey. That narrow valley through which this vast flood of water poured is now a narrow sea channel which we call the Bosphorus. Here, the continents of Asia and Europe are separated by only about 750 meters of sea at their narrowest point. A second narrow channel known as the Dardanelles sits nearly 300 kilometers to the west, where once the ancient city of Troy stood as a rival to the Bronze Age city- states of Greece. Between these two thin entryways is the world's smallest sea, known as the Sea of Marmara. It's right here that the city of Byzantium was founded. Byzantium was an ancient Greek colony founded by settlers from the powerful port city of Megara around the year 667 BC. Folklore attributes the founding of the city to a prince of Megara named Byzas, and the inspiration for Byzas' journey came from the oracle at Delphi. Modern analysis has shown that this oracle was built at a place where volcanic gases were vented from the earth through cracks in the planet's crust. The priestesses of this oracle would descend into chambers flooded with these gases, which would send them into a trance-like, hallucinatory state, ready to give prophecies to those who asked for them. According to this piece of folklore, the oracle at Delphi gave Prince Byzas a haunting piece of advice. You must set sail and search for the land opposite the city of the blind. So, Byzas sailed across the sea, through the narrow Dardanelles Strait, and into the Sea of Marmara. There, he saw what he was looking for. On the Asian side of the sea, a Greek colony named Chalcedon had been established. But Byzas saw immediately that the European side of the sea was a much better place for a colony, a defensible position with a large natural harbor. The settlers of Chalcedon had been blind to miss this perfect spot, and so Byzas had found the land opposite the city of the blind. He landed on the shore and named the city he founded there Byzantion after himself. The advantages that Byzas saw in the city were indeed formidable. It sat right at the narrowest point of the Bosphorus Strait, the point where Asia was less than a kilometer away over the water. This was a natural crossing point, controlling all the land-based trade that ferried between the continents, but it also controlled all shipping traffic that passed between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean. On top of this, the swift currents that flowed through the narrow channel would make it very difficult for any army to attack by sea.