After his death in the year 632, the successors of Muhammad took up his mantle. To their north, they spread out of the Arabian Peninsula and faced ahead of them the lands of both the Sassanids in Mesopotamia and Persia, and the Byzantines in Egypt. But these two great ancient empires had been hollowed out from within, weakened and bankrupted by their incessant wars. The last great war between these two empires had ended only a few years before, after grinding on for nearly three decades and critically weakening them. The Arab advance came as a complete surprise. The Byzantines were distracted by their wars and paid little heed to news that was trickling across the desert to the south. They had also stopped paying tribute to the desert tribes who they usually relied on to pass them information. In the year 634, to the surprise of the entire world, the Arab armies defeated a Byzantine force sent into Syria and captured Damascus in a lightning strike. The Byzantines tried again in 636 but a sandstorm scattered their forces, and when the Arab cavalry bore down on them, they were utterly annihilated. Arab armies fought using swords made of the finest Indian steel, riding on the backs of camels and horses, versatile and fast across the desert landscape. Their tactics were primarily defensive, luring their opponents into ill-advised attacks, with large groups of archers placed on both flanks. The only hope for the Byzantines was now that their great rivals, the Sassanids, would halt the Arab advance. But this hope would be in vain. In fact, Arab attacks would bring about the complete disintegration and collapse of the Sassanid Empire. Four hundred years later, the Persian poet Firdusi would write the following lament about the end of this great power. Damn this world, damn this time, damn this fate! Where are your valiant warriors and priests? Where are your hunting parties and your feasts? Where is that warlike spirit and where are those great armies that destroyed our country's foes? Count Iran as a ruin, as the lair of lions and leopards. Look now and despair. The Byzantines watched helplessly as their Asian territories were swallowed up. Jerusalem, recaptured less than a decade before at enormous cost, surrendered to Arab armies in the year 637. For the general emperor Heraclius, on whom the Byzantines had pinned such hopes, this catastrophic defeat proved too much. He had once been the commander of his father's fleet, a bold and accomplished sailor. But in his old age, he developed an overwhelming thalassophobia, or fear of the sea. On his way back to Constantinople from Asia, he found even the 700-meter crossing of the Bosphorus too terrifying. His men had to tie boats together across the whole length of the crossing, covering them with shrubs and matting so that the terrified old emperor couldn't see the water, rocking dark and deep beneath him. And Egypt fell to Arab forces in the year 642. The Byzantine Empire lost its rich food supplies, which had been a major source of grain for the capital. This arrangement had been in place since the time of the ancient Romans and now the entire economic structure of the Byzantine Empire would have to be rearranged overnight. Food shortages were now added to the list of the empire's problems. By 647, the last Byzantine territory in Africa, the ancient city of Carthage, had also fallen to the advancing Arab armies. In the year 644, to the Byzantines' horror, the Arab Empire began building a navy. Only a decade later, it was strong enough to raid the island of Cyprus and Rhodes. Neither island put up even a scrap of resistance and it soon became clear that Byzantium was no longer able to defend its empire. In the year 654, the Emperor Constans personally set sail with the Byzantine Navy, the pride of the empire and its last line of defense, to meet the Arab fleet in battle. The writer Theophanes the Confessor recalls what happened next. In this year, Muawiya commanded that a great naval armament should be made with a view to his fleet sailing against Constantinople. This man arrived at Phoenix in Lycia, where the Emperor Constans lay with the Roman fleet and engaged him in a sea battle. Now, the emperor, who had taken no measures to draw up his battle line, ordered the Roman fleet to fight. When the two sides engaged, the Romans were defeated and the sea was dyed with Roman blood. In the ensuing struggle, 500 Byzantine ships were destroyed. The Emperor Constans was forced to swap clothes with another man and flee in the garb of a common soldier, a stinging humiliation for this emperor of the Byzantines. The emperor then put his robes on another man. This courageous man then stationed himself bravely on the imperial ship and killed many of the enemy before giving up his life on behalf of the emperor. The enemy surrounded him and held him in their midst, thinking he was the emperor. After he had slain many of them, they killed him too as the man was wearing the imperial robes. Thus routed, the emperor escaped and leaving everyone behind, sailed off to Constantinople. The city of Constantinople was now completely defenseless. Now firmly in control of Syria and the Mediterranean coast, Arab armies were able to send frequent raiding parties deep into Anatolia. In the year 674, they felt bold enough to make a strike at the great city, Constantinople itself. The Arab fleet began by capturing port towns along the coast and then setting up a blockade of Constantinople, attempting to choke the life from the city. Theophanes the Confessor recalls these events in his chronicle. In this year in March, a rainbow appeared in the sky and all mankind shuddered. Everyone said it was the end of the world. In this year, the deniers of Christ readied a great expedition. The emperor at the time was named Constantine IV and he must have wondered whether this was finally the end of the empire that had once ruled all of Europe. But the Byzantines had one more trick up their sleeve. In fact, in recent years, they had developed a secret superweapon of terrifying power that would soon become famous around the world. This weapon is so mysterious that today there is still lively debate over what exactly it was. The scholars of Byzantium guarded its secrets so jealously that today its name is synonymous with the Greek Byzantines who developed it. That weapon was Greek fire. Incendiary weapons had been used in warfare for centuries before Greek fire was invented. Flaming arrows and pots containing combustible substances were used by the Assyrians as early as the 9th century BC. But the substance known as Greek fire was different. It was reportedly developed by a man named Kallinikos who had fled the Arab conquests as a refugee and had been given refuge in the city of Constantinople. This city, which had seen refugees rise to become emperors, now saw the secret of its survival come to it from the midst The medieval writer Anna Komnena gives one account that is thought to describe this terrifying weapon. This fire is made by the following arts. From the pine and the certain such evergreen trees, inflammable resin is collected. This is rubbed with sulfur and put into tubes of reed and is blown by men using it with violent and continuous breath. Then in this manner, it meets the fire on the tip and catches light and falls like a fiery whirlwind on the faces of the enemies. The refugee Kallinikos is said to have demonstrated his Greek fire to the Byzantine emperor. It was a flaming substance, possibly based on petroleum, that seemed to set even the surface of the sea ablaze. Water couldn't douse its flames and by some accounts, even made them more intense. Its use was accompanied with smoke and the sounds of thunder. One remarkable Norse saga relates the story of a Viking warrior named Ingvar the Far-Traveled, a traveler who sailed down the Volga River and into the Caspian Sea to explore the lands of Asia. Ingvar apparently faced ships equipped with Greek fire weaponry, which is described in the saga. They began blowing with smith's bellows at a furnace in which there was fire and there came from it a great din. There stood there also a brass or bronze tube and from it flew much fire against one ship and it burned up in a short time so that all of it had become white ashes. Whatever its exact composition, we know the effect that this weapon had. The writer Theophanes recalls these dramatic events in his chronicle as the ships of the Arab forces bore down on the great city. When Constantine learned of the movement of God's enemies against Constantinople, he prepared huge two-storied warships equipped with Greek fire and siphon-carrying warships, ordering them to anchor in the harbor of the Caesareum. All day long from dawn to dusk there was combat from the outworks of the Golden Gate to Cyclobion. Both sides were thrusting and counter-thrusting, but with the aid of God and his mother they were disgraced, expending a host of warlike men. They retreated in great distress with severe wounds. As their expedition was going away after God had ruined it, it was overtaken by a tempestuous winter storm near Sileon. It was shivered to atoms and completely destroyed. This defeat on sea was coupled with a Byzantine victory on land and the Arab forces withdrew, suffering enormous losses. Growing divisions in their own lands soon forced them to attend to their own affairs and a peace deal was struck. A second siege of Constantinople was attempted at the start of the 8th century, but once again the use of Greek fire drove the enemy armies back into their lands. The Byzantine Empire had survived yet another existential threat and the city of Constantinople remained the impregnable fortress that the Emperor Theodosius had hoped. Over the next few centuries, storm after storm would rage on the city of Constantinople, but it would always hold. Its powerful walls, its natural defenses and the ingenious invention of Greek fire would keep it safe from its enemies in Asia and in Europe. I'm going to fast forward the story now until around the 10th century and pause there for a moment to take a look at what life was like in the Byzantine Empire during this time. For the Byzantine people, the city of Constantinople was a source of
pride. They called it the eye of the world showing the Byzantine crescent moon would have fluttered and snapped over its rooftops. Travelers and pilgrims to the Holy Land usually pass through Constantinople on their route and they have left us vivid accounts of the city's beauty and magnificence. One Russian visitor, Steven of Novgorod, described the city in the following terms. Entering Constantinople is like entering a great forest. It is impossible to get around without a good guide and if you try to get around on the cheap without offering tips, you'll be unable to see or kiss a single saint. Another pilgrim named Foti described the enormous wealth of churches and icon houses around the city. It is impossible to go to all the holy monasteries or holy relics or to recount them. Still, there are thousands upon thousands of relics of saints and many wonders which it is impossible to describe. Foti even witnessed an imperial procession, although he does fall foul of the hands-on approach of some of the Byzantine imperial guards. We set out the next day for the Balacaray Palace. I soon lost my companions in the crowd and stepped up onto the base of a pillar to try and see them. Instead, I caught a glimpse of the imperial family as they entered, splendid in the most luxuriously embroidered golden robes imaginable and wearing golden crowns. As the ceremony started, however, I was rudely knocked off the pillar by some of the imperial guards and sent sprawling onto the stone floor. Some of these may have been part of the famed unit called the Varangian Guards, made up of Viking warriors from Scandinavia. Walking around the city at this time, visitors would have wandered down narrow streets between buildings built from the orange-brown bricks still manufactured with Roman methods. Church bells would have rung out, the singing of somber Byzantine chants from the churches, the calling of seabirds, and the clatter of the wooden shutters in the houses. Countless languages would have been heard on these streets since Constantinople at this time had welcomed people from all over the known world, as one 10th century knight named Bartolth of Nangis would write. In this city are Greeks, Bulgarians, Alans, Comans, Pigmaticans, Italians, Venetians, Romanians, Dacians, English, Amalfitans, even Turks, many heathen peoples, Jews and proselytes, Cretans and Arabs, and people of all nations come together here. The doors of the houses were often built of iron, studded with stout nails. Large houses had a courtyard with stables, cattle sheds, chicken coops, and storerooms looking out over it. Staircases were built of wood, although stone was used in the more prosperous houses, and in some, even marble. Many of these wealthy houses were also centrally heated, using a hypercaused system inherited directly from the ancient Romans, although most people simply burned charcoal in iron braziers. Their kitchens had low hearths with square pipes forming a chimney to carry away their smoke. During the day, the skyline of Constantinople must have been fogged with the smoke from these chimneys, and the smells of wood smoke and baking food must have drifted out over its terracotta tiles. The tastes of the city would have been distinctive, too. According to the 11th century cook Simeon Seth, cinnamon arrived in the city around this time, which he believed came from the northern Iraqi city of Mosul. In fact, it had likely traveled all the way from Sri Lanka. Byzantines ate fish like the bass and gray mullet, and drank spiced wine called konditon, along with sausages and the ubiquitous fermented fish sauce known as garum, which would have filled the air with its earthy sea salt aroma. New crops like aubergines or eggplant, along with spinach, oranges, and lemons arrived in Constantinople and all of these would have added to the smells wafting through these streets. Street performers would have plied their trades, acrobats and jugglers and fire eaters. One bishop of Cremona visiting in the year 949 describes seeing one of these performances. A man carried on his head, without using his hands, a wooden pole 24 feet or more long. Then two boys appeared who went up on the pole, did various tricks on it and then came down head first, keeping the pole all the time as steady as though it were rooted in the earth, which filled me with great astonishment and admiration. But of course, being poor in Constantinople was a pretty miserable existence. Only the most fortunate among them lived in houses which were rooved over with rushes and floored with beaten earth. From the 5th century onwards, skyscraper blocks of flats containing anything from five to nine stories were built as tenement buildings, just like in a modern city. These were divided into flats which were let out to working people at exploitative prices and were usually little better than slums. One visitor to the city named Odo of Dioi, passing through in the year 1147, summarizes the seedy underbelly of the city with this stinging observation. Constantinople is a city of extremes. She surpasses other cities in wealth, and she surpasses them in vice. Constantinople itself is squalid and fetid, and in many places afflicted by permanent darkness. For the wealthy overshadow the streets with buildings and leave these dirty, dark places to the poor and to travellers. There, murders and robberies and other crimes of the night are committed. People live untouched by the law in this city, for all its rich men are bullies and many of its poor men are thieves. But whatever the varying feelings about this city, no one could deny that it was a vibrant, energetic place. A later writer, Nicetas Konaites, describes some of the smells of sizzling food that must have filled the streets of Constantinople on a daily basis as the city's different cultures mixed and melded their culinary traditions. They reveled and drank strong wine all day long. Some favored luxury foods while others recreated their own native dishes such as ox rib apiece, slices of salt pork cut with beans, and sauces made with garlic or combination of other bitter flavors. It wasn't just the smell of food that would have filled the air. In fact, Constantinople was famous for its spice markets and perfumeries, as this extract from the City Guild's Book of Regulations shows. They are to sell pepper, spikenard, cinnamon, alloswood, ambergris, musk, frankincense, myrrh, balsam, indigo, dyer's herbs, lapis lazuli, fustic, storex, and in short any article used for perfumery and dyeing. Their stalls shall be placed in a row between the milestone and the revered icon of Christ that stands above the bronze arcade so that the aroma may waft upwards to the icon and at the same time fill the vestibule of the royal palace. Sugar, ginger, and sandalwood came to Byzantium from India, while nutmeg and cloves came from as far away as Indonesia. On the days when imperial processions and religious ceremonies were being held, the unpleasant everyday smells of the medieval city were covered with wreaths of rosemary and pine chips, as well as rose petals which were hung in the streets along with bundles of marjoram. But above everything else, visitors to the city were struck time and again with awe by its size and magnificence. At half a million people, it was the largest city they would ever see. On witnessing its massive walls, its paved boulevards, and tall spiraling columns, its vast palace and the golden dome of the Hagia Sophia,
glinting in the sun, visitors to the city were often left speechless. In the mid-10th century, the poet Constantinus of Rhodes wrote about the effect this city had on arriving travelers. After a long and wearisome journey, the traveler sees from a distance towers rising high into the air, and like strong giants in stride, columns that rise up to the highest point and tall houses and temples whose vast roofs reach to the heights. Who would not become instantly filled with joy? When he reaches the wall and draws near to the gates, who does not greet the city, lower his neck, kneel to the ground, and grasp the famous earth? But over the preceding centuries, the world around Constantinople had changed. In Western Europe, the post-Roman era had given way to the Middle Ages. The Latin-speaking Western Empire had fractured and made way for a patchwork of kingdoms, speaking numerous different languages, but all tied together with their relationship to a church that spoke Latin in its services. These people of Western Europe seemed terribly crude to the sophisticated people of Byzantium. They referred to them sometimes simply as Latins, but more commonly as Franks. The ancient capital of Rome had risen once again, not as an imperial power but as the center of Roman Catholicism and the seat of the pope. The differences in translation between the Greek and Latin religious texts naturally led to disagreements between the branches of Christianity, some of them exceedingly bitter. In the year 1054, an event known as the East-West Schism would tear the Christian world down the middle. All Latin churches in Constantinople were shut down and excommunications were fired like volleys of arrows from one side of Europe to another. This rift between the Latins and the Greeks would only grow wider as time went on. In Western Europe, a feudal system now dictated that high-born people, the lords and ladies of the land, were born into their right to rule. In the West, it was impossible for peasants to rise above the lowly station they were born into. But in Byzantium, there was no legal status given to nobles. There were the powerful and wealthy, of course, and they used every means available to maintain and increase that power. But those great families could fall and others could rise out of nowhere. The founder of one great ruling dynasty, a 9th century king named Basileus I, is one incredible example. He was another peasant who traveled to the city to escape the poverty of his life in the countryside, and he rose through Byzantine society to become the emperor. Over its history, four emperors of Byzantium were also women. The lack of feudal system also made the empire a remarkably modern kind of bureaucracy for its time. Western European kings now ruled over fractious landholding lords and feudal barons, all of whom had to be constantly placated in order to keep the peace and avoid a civil war. These lords would raise their own armies and taxed their own peasants, only coming together under the king's banner in times of war. But the Byzantine Empire collected taxes directly from its provinces, just as the ancient Romans had, and they operated a centralized bureaucracy that paid magistrates and officials, as well as its powerful and centralized military. But despite this, Byzantine emperors sat at the top of an incredibly precarious pyramid.