In the year 1858, the French novelist Gustave Flaubert arrived in North Africa, hoping to find inspiration for his latest book. Flaubert was a seasoned traveler and a decade or so earlier had embarked on a grand tour of Cairo, Constantinople, Greece, and Italy. But the writer who now departed on this new set of travels was like a different man. Although only 37 years old, he was plagued by sickness and prone to fits of depression, and the novel he had been working on for the last year was threatening to drive him mad. The publication of his most famous work two years before, the novel Madame Bovary, had brought him fame and wealth, but now he was attempting to write a piece of fiction quite unlike anything he had ever attempted. It would be a story from classical history that took place in an empire that had once flourished in the north of Africa, had become the most powerful society in the ancient world, and then had vanished in its entirety more than 2,000 years ago, an empire that had been largely forgotten beside the more well-studied societies of classical Greece and Rome. This was the Empire of Carthage. He had spent the last months locked up in his study like a hermit, surrounded by the work of ancient historians trying to bring the lost city of Carthage back to life. But the writing just wouldn't come, as he wrote to his friend, Ernest Fadoe. I'm done for, my friend, done for. For the past month, I've found it impossible to write. I can't find a single word. Just think of what I've let myself in for, to resuscitate an entire civilization with nothing whatsoever to go on. Robert made the decision that something would have to change. He wrote of his intentions to his friend, Mademoiselle Leroyer de Chantepy. I absolutely must take a trip to Africa, so toward the end of March, I'll return to the land of dates. Once again, I'll live on horseback and sleep under a tent. I need only to go to El Kef and explore the environs of Carthage in order to acquaint myself thoroughly with the landscapes I'll be describing. When he arrived in Tunisia, Flaubert jotted down hurried impressions in his notebooks as he explored the ruins of the ancient cities of Utica and Carthage, now all but buried beneath the modern Tunisian capital of Tunis. In the green wheat full of flowering poppies, the road climbs little, sloping to the left and arrives at a valley, flat plains in the middle at a league's distance, ruins like palm trees, and here and there, blocks of masonry. We are walking on the remains of a Roman road. As he walked among the ruined walls of this ancient city, Flaubert felt himself connected to the ancient people he had been trying to write about, and saw ways of life that must have remained almost unchanged since the days of Carthage. In the south, the village of Sidi Bou Saïd, the sea behind, like a great block of indigo. All Carthage now stretches out before me, a camel on a terrace, turning a well. Flies are buzzing, weeds hang from the halls like chandeliers, a bird takes flight with the sound of a wing, another sings. Very fine dust, silence, green marks on the walls, livid and thick water in some basins. By the time he had finished his wanderings among the Carthaginian ruins of Tunisia, Flaubert had decided to completely rewrite the draft of his book, as he writes to Mademoiselle de Chantepierre. Everything I had done on my novel has to be done over. I was on the wrong track entirely, so it turns out that a little over a year since I first had the idea for the book, and after working hard on it most of that time, I am still only at the beginning. Armed with his Tunisian notebooks, Flaubert finished his book. book four years later, and it was published under the title of Salambo. The book was an enormous success. It inspired plays and later even silent films, and it is credited with renewing public interest in a city and a culture that had once been considered a side note of history. As Flaubert walked those ruined walls and sunken harbors, as he kicked his way through the dust and scree of the crumbling city ruins, he must have asked himself again and again, what did it feel like to walk the streets of that ancient city? What was it like to see Carthage at the height of its golden age? And what would it have felt like to see this entire city, its streets and houses, its temples and theaters, its harbors and its homes, utterly destroyed and buried in dust and ash? My name's Paul Cooper and you're listening to the Fall of Civilizations podcast. Each episode, I look at a civilization of the past that rose to glory and then collapsed into the ashes of history. I want to ask, what did they have in common, what led to their fall, and what did it feel like to be a person alive at the time who witnessed the end of their world? In this episode, I want to tell one of the most dramatic stories to come down to us from the ancient world, the rise and fall of the Empire of Carthage. I want to show how this city rose out of the Phoenician states of the eastern Mediterranean and set out on voyages of discovery and settlement that put them at the center of the ancient world. I want to describe the unique culture that flourished on the shores of North Africa, and I want to tell the story of how the city of Carthage was destroyed and its memory nearly wiped from the earth. The Mediterranean Sea is a vast body of saltwater that lies between the continents of Europe and Africa. It's by far the largest inland sea on the planet, stretching around 4,000 kilometers from end to end. In the west, it's connected to the Atlantic Ocean by a thin opening at the Straits of Gibraltar. The coastline of this sea is more than 46,000 kilometers long, or enough to wrap around the entire circumference of the planet. This coastline has provided a home to countless cultures and civilizations over history. One of these cultures emerged on the easternmost corner of the Mediterranean coast, on a stony stretch of shore in what is today Lebanon, overlooked by towering mountains covered in cedar forest. Here, a series of city-states rose up more than 4,000 years ago that would give rise to a culture that would one day be called the Phoenicians. The largest of these cities were named Tyre, Sidon, and Byblos. Pinched as they were between the waves to the west and the forested mountains to the east, the territories they ruled over were never large, but this relatively isolated geography also meant that they were somewhat protected from invaders. The people we now think of as Phoenician wouldn't have ever used that word. Phoenician is a term invented later by their great rivals, the Greeks, and it's unclear if these cities ever thought of themselves as a unified people. They had a common Phoenician language and were united by the worship of certain gods, among them Baal-Haman, a heroic god named Melkart, and his wife Astarte. But there's very little in the historical record to suggest a common identity, architecture, or literature. Even the Greek word Phoenician
has a somewhat mysterious origin. The word phoenice is used to describe a particular colour of purple or crimson, and it is also used to describe a date palm, possibly due to the reddish colour of its fruit when ripe. And so, it's possible that the word came to be used as a result of one of the Phoenicians' earliest and most successful industries. The Phoenicians of Tyre and other cities were the first people to colour their clothes with a particular kind of dye derived from the bodies of predatory sea snails known as the murax or rock snail. These snails produce their dye as a defense mechanism against predators, and depending on the species, can produce a vivid red or purple colour quite unlike anything else available in the ancient world. From the moment these dyes were first used by Phoenicians around the 16th century BC, their colours became immediately sought after. But the process of producing these dyes was difficult and costly. It could take more than 50 kilograms of these snails to make a single gram of dye, and so these fabrics were extremely expensive. The colour purple would soon become associated with enormous wealth, and as a consequence, with royalty. This colour would be known as Tyrian purple, after the Phoenician city of Tyre, and later imperial purple. It would dye the robes of the emperors of Assyria, Rome, and later Byzantium. The first-century Roman writer Pliny the Elder writes about the effect this colour had on anyone who saw it. For purple, the rods and axes of Rome clear a path, and it likewise marks the dignity of boyhood. It distinguishes senator from noble, and it is summoned to secure the favour of the gods. It illuminates every garment, and on the triumphal robe, it is blended with gold. But why the price? It's possible then that the term phoenike came to be used by the Greeks to describe these traders from the rocky coast of Lebanon as the makers of purple, or the purple people. The name of the mythical creature the phoenix, an immortal bird with red feathers, also seems to derive from the same word. With their dye industry booming, the Phoenicians began to set out on ever longer voyages out into the Mediterranean Sea, all in search of ever more of these priceless snails. These longer voyages would require new developments in shipbuilding. Since as early as the third millennium BC, Phoenician sailors from the city of Byblos had developed ships with curved hulls, perfectly suited for traveling on the waves, and they had developed techniques for waterproofing the hulls of their ships using bitumen or pitch. In the Hebrew Bible, the 6th century BC Book of Ezekiel contains one poetic description of a Phoenician ship. They made all your timbers of juniper from Sinia. They took a cedar from Lebanon to make a mast for you. Of oaks from Bashan, they made your oars. Of cypress wood from the coasts of Cyprus, they made your deck, adorned with ivory. Fine embroidered linen from Egypt was your sail and served as your banner. Your awnings were of blue and purple from the coasts of Elisha. The Phoenicians were also some of the earliest people to notice the pole star or polaris, a star that happens to align more or less perfectly with the rotational axis of the earth. This means that while all other stars appear to rotate in the sky throughout the night as the earth turns, the pole star remains more or less fixed in place. This made it exceptionally useful as a navigation tool, a fixed reference point in the sky. In Greek, this star would even come to be known as Phoenike, or the Phoenician star. The Phoenicians' early voyages around the Mediterranean led to them encountering many other peoples, and among these, they began to cultivate a reputation. as uncompromising traders and shrewd gained them some degree of unpopularity. Homer's Odyssey, probably written down in the 7th or 8th century BC from even more ancient oral traditions, describes the Phoenicians as cunning and untrustworthy, in contrast to the supposedly noble Greeks. There they came, Phoenicians, men famed for their ships, greedy knaves bringing countless trinkets in their black ship. It seems the Phoenicians had become adept at metalworking, too. The following passage in Homer's Odyssey describes an ornate bowl brought by traders from the Phoenician city of Sidon. Then the son of Peleus set forth other prizes, a mixing bowl of silver, richly wrought in beauty far the goodliest in all the earth. Sidonians, well-skilled in deft handiwork, had wrought it cunningly. A man of the Phoenicians brought it over the murky deep and landed it in harbour. As a sea-faring people, the Phoenicians had a clear preference for building their cities on narrow, easily defended peninsulas and where possible on islands set just offshore. Their most influential city of Tyre was a perfect example, located on a small island just off the rocky coast. In the Hebrew Bible, the prophet Ezekiel gives us a sense of the trade that the people of Tyre drove with their surrounding neighbors. Tarshish did business with you because of your great wealth of goods. They exchanged silver, iron, tin, and lead for your merchandise. Greece, Tubal, and Meshech did business with you. They traded human beings and articles of bronze for your wares. Men of Beth Tugama exchanged chariot horses, cavalry horses, and mules. Aram exchanged turquoise, purple fabric, embroidered work, fine linen, coral, and rubies. Judah and Israel traded with you. They exchanged wheat from minneth, honey, olive oil, and balm. While the natural defenses of their geography had kept cities like Tyre independent for much of their history, this wasn't to last forever. The first millennium BC was an age of iron and an age of empires, and soon the Phoenicians found themselves in a world of increasingly violent and aggressive neighbors. Perhaps the most terrifying of these was the power of the Assyrian Empire. From its heartlands in what is today Iraq, the Assyrian war machine would periodically stretch its power right to the coast of the Mediterranean and threaten to engulf the Phoenicians. One inscription from the palace of an Assyrian king gives just one example of the typical fate of a city conquered by the Assyrians. That city I destroyed, I flung my soldiers like lightning upon them. I piled up heaps of heads in front of his great gate, bands of captive soldiers I impaled on stakes on every side of his city. His palm trees I cut down, and from the city of Amidi, I departed. The Phoenicians had every reason to be nervous. At the start of the 8th century BC, the Assyrian king Adad-Nirari III conquered the territory of northern Syria, as he boasts in his royal palace inscriptions. Conquering from the Saluna mountain of the rising sun, and from the banks of the Euphrates, the country of Hatti, Amurra in its full extent, the land of Tyre, the land of Sidon, the land of Israel, the land of Edom, the land of Philistia, I made them submit to my feat, imposing upon them tribute. The Assyrians were now breathing directly down the necks of the Phoenician cities of the coast. But as time went on, the Phoenicians were able to carve out a niche for themselves that ensured they were quite simply too useful for the Assyrians to destroy. The Mediterranean Sea had
long been an insurmountable challenge to many of the region's great powers. The Assyrians referred to it as Id Marati, or the Bitter River, which they believed to flow around the whole earth, while the Egyptians referred to it as Wadj-Wer, or the Great Green. These empires were freshwater river cultures and navigated the waters of their rivers in flat-bottomed barges. For this reason, they had always remained wary of the rougher waters of the sea. Assyria relied heavily on many of the commodities brought into the region by Phoenician traders, incense, silver, and purple dye for their palaces, bronze and iron for their armies. And so, Assyria offered the cities of Tyre and Sidon something of a deal. They would be allowed a degree of independence so long as they ensured a constant flow of metals and other resources into Assyria, and so long as they acted as a kind of navy for hire, providing their ships and sailors to Assyria in times of war. The Phoenicians had little choice but to accept. But there was one problem. The Assyrian demands for metal were truly staggering, and if they were going to be met, it would require a drastic expansion of the Phoenician trade network. At first, the Phoenicians set up simple trading posts anywhere they could find good supplies of metal. Archaeology shows they set up communities in Cyprus to take advantage of its rich stores of copper, and in Sardinia, the Mediterranean's second-largest island, rich in copper, iron, silver, and lead. At these sites, local people usually did all the actual mining, while the Phoenicians simply turned up to buy the goods and take them away by ship. From Cyprus and Sardinia, Phoenician sailors pushed on into the west of the Mediterranean and set up the small colony of Utica in North Africa, and even reached southern Spain where they found that the mines practically overflowed with silver, iron, and other metals. Archaeologists have found huge Phoenician furnaces in this region, designed for smelting metal ingots for transportation on an industrial scale, all to satisfy the demands of the fearsome Assyrian kings. Before long, the Phoenicians were sailing out through the Straits of Gibraltar, then known as the Pillars of Hercules, and out into the Atlantic Ocean. They set up a colony at Lyxus on the western coast of Morocco and pushed further down the coast to settle what is now the Moroccan port town of Essaouira, more than 4,000 kilometers from their homeland. To finance these expeditions, the Phoenicians developed innovative monetary systems that in some ways represented a form of ancient capitalism. Phoenician society was dominated by powerful trading firms, usually run by a certain family, and they pioneered the use of interest-bearing loans for voyages, even developing maritime insurance policies which paid out if your ships were destroyed in a storm or plundered by pirates. But perhaps the greatest of their innovations was something that we use every day, and that is the alphabet. Up until that point, writing had been a cumbersome and difficult task. The cuneiform writing systems that had been developed by the Sumerians thousands of years before and the hieroglyphics of the Egyptians were both difficult to learn and relied on the services of a learned class of scribes who spent years of their lives learning them. But the Phoenician alphabet was a master class in simplicity. It had only 22 letters and could be used to spell out words phonetically, leaving out any vowels. Quite ingeniously, the shapes of the letters also gave a clue as to how they were pronounced. Their letter B, for instance, was named bet, which was the Phoenician word for house, and its symbol was drawn with a pointed roof. This simplicity drastically reduced the amount of time it took to learn and meant that common traders and merchants may have had some ability to read and write and to keep records, essential for the complex business
of buying and selling across the sea. The Phoenician alphabet was such a good idea that it was adopted almost wholesale by the Greeks, as the Greek historian Herodotus recounts. These Phoenicians who came with Cadmus brought with them to Greece, among many other kinds of loaning, the alphabet. As time went on, the sound and form of the letters were changed and after being taught the letters by the Phoenicians, the Greeks who were settled around them used them with a few changes of form. With the addition of some letters for vowels, what resulted was the Greek alphabet which means that the Phoenician writing system is the foundation of all Western alphabets used today. The earliest piece of Phoenician writing was found on an inscribed tablet known as the Nora Stone unearthed in Sardinia, apparently commemorating a Phoenician captain who may have died in conflict with the local people. He fought with the Sardinians at Tarshish and he drove them out. Among the Sardinians, he is now at peace and his army is at peace. Milchaton, son of Shubna, general of King Pumae. But for the most part, the Phoenicians seemed to have interacted with the people they met relatively peacefully, and most of all, profitably. Before long, the cities of Tyre, Sidon, and Byblos found themselves at the far east of a sprawling trade network. Keeping such a loose and disparate collection of colonies together was no easy task, but it seems that here, the Phoenician religion played a key role. The people of Tyre worshipped a heroic god known as Melkart, a warrior hero who the Greeks would later associate with Hercules. Temples to Melkart were set up at multiple Phoenician trading posts and most had an olive tree, a symbol of the city of Tyre, growing in their central courtyard. The grandest of these temples was built at the furthest Phoenician colony from Tyre, then known as Gardiz, what is now the Spanish city of Cadiz. This colony sat on the Atlantic coast just outside the Straits of Gibraltar, but it made up for its extreme distance from Tyre with its immense opulence. At the center of the temple stood an olive tree with its branches and leaves wrought out of solid gold, holding emerald fruits in its branches. Women were forbidden entry to the temple, as were pigs, and the priests of Melkart went barefoot, wearing a band of Egyptian flax over their bare heads. The Greek geographer Strabo recounts the following description of the settlement of Gardiz. Now, these islands are this side of what are called the Pillars of Heracles.