When the envoys, boasting of the renown and valour of the Roman people and the extent of their dominion, requested the Gauls to deny the Phoenician a passage through their lands and cities if he should attempt to carry the war into Italy, it is said that they burst out into such
of laughter that the magistrates and elders could scarce reduce the younger men to order. So stupid and impudent a thing it seemed to propose that the Gauls should bring down the war on their own heads and offer their own fields to be pillaged in place of other men's. This was perhaps the first sign that things weren't going to go as the Romans might have wished. But on his march south, Hannibal did encounter significant resistance from local peoples who didn't welcome the presence of his army. In France, it was only through the excessive distribution of gifts that the Gauls allowed him and his men to pass. The first true obstacle was the River Rhône, one of France's largest rivers. Here, Hannibal's army crossed with difficulty, building rafts to ferry his men and equipment across. But the elephants here posed a significant challenge. These animals were terrified of water, and so to get them across, the Carthaginians built enormous rafts built from whole tree trunks and covered them with earth and turf so that the elephants would believe they were still standing on dry land. In that way, they were able to coax two of the females onto the rafts and across the river, and from there, the rest of the herd were ferried across. Hannibal then followed the River Rhône north and found a tribe of Gauls who agreed to help him achieve his impossible plan, to cross the vast natural barrier of the Alps. These Gauls gave Hannibal and his men supplies and warm clothing for the mountain crossing, but the task ahead was still staggering. By this time, it was October. Winter was closing in, and the passes of the Alps were choked with ice and snow. The later Roman writer Ammianus Marcellinus writes one account of these treacherous Alpine passes. In these Alps, there rises a lofty ridge which scarcely anyone can cross without danger, for as one comes from Gaul, it falls off with sheer incline, terrible to look upon because of overhanging cliffs on either side. Then over precipitous ravines on either side, and chasms rendered treacherous through the accumulation of ice, men and animals descending with hesitating steps slide forward, and wagons as well. In winter, the ground, caked with ice and as if it were polished and therefore slippery, drives men headlong in their gait, and the spreading valleys, made treacherous by ice, sometimes swallow up the traveller. The march to the top of the pass took nine days, and we can only imagine the hardship that these men, their horses and oxen and elephants, all endured during those days. But on the ninth day, they reached the top and now gazed down through the Alpine pass into the green lowlands of Italy stretching out below them. But the descent from the mountains would prove to be even more treacherous than the climb. On their way down, they found that a recent landslide had turned what was already a difficult road into an unpassable precipice. The historian Livy describes the obstacle that faced them. The result was a horrible struggle, the ice affording no foothold in any case, and least of all on a steep slope. When a man tried by hands or knees to get on his feet again, even those useless supports slipped from under him and let him down. There were no stumps or roots anywhere to afford a purchase to either hand or foot. In short, there was nothing for it but to roll and slither on the smooth ice and melting snow. The decision was made to cut a stepped path into this sheer wall, and the episode has become one of the most famous in the mythical retelling of these events that would place over the next centuries. The story goes that Hannibal ordered his men to gather large amounts of wood and build a great fire against the rock of the precipice. As the fire blazed and the flames licked at the icy stone, the rock heated up. Then, the soldiers would pour their rations of sour wine
against the heated rock, causing its and the rock to crack. With iron tools, they then worked away at these fissures, until after four days of labour, steps were cut into the rock, as Livy recounts. After thus heating the crag with fire, they opened a way in it with iron tools, and relieved the steepness of the slope with zigzags of an easy gradient, so that not only the baggage animals but even the elephants could be let down. Four days were consumed at the cliff, and the animals nearly perished of starvation, for the mountain tops are all practically bare, and such grass as does grow is buried under snow. Whether this episode unfolded quite in this manner or not, from the perspective of Hannibal's followers, the purpose of telling this story was clear. Here was a new Hercules, it said, a man who has crossed the Alps with his herd of elephants, a man who achieves great labours wherever he goes, a man for whom the very rock of the mountain presents no obstacle. Climbing down into the foothills, the men must have felt the lowland warmth wash over their skin for the first time, with a sense of enormous relief, as Livy recounts. Lower down, one comes to valleys and sunny slopes and rivulets, and near them woods and places that begin to be fitter for man's habitation. There, the beasts were turned out to graze, and the men, exhausted with toiling at the road, were allowed to rest. But the audacity of Hannibal's plan had come at a cost, as Polybius writes. When Hannibal crossed the Rhone, he had 38,000 infantry and more than 8,000 cavalry. He lost nearly half in the pass, while the survivors, heard by these long-continued sufferings, become almost savage in look and general appearance. Nevertheless, Hannibal and his men now stood and looked out over the lands of Italy below. They had caught the Romans completely by surprise. At the outbreak of war with Carthage, Rome knew that Hannibal's army was on the move. They sent out messengers to find out any word about the location of his forces, but recently, they had been coming back empty-handed. After crossing the River Rhone, the Carthaginian general had disappeared. He wasn't in Gaul, he wasn't in Spain, for the Romans, the situation must have been puzzling and a little concerning. When news came to them of what Hannibal had done, the first note of panic began to set in. Polybius recounts the reaction of one Roman general. Publius had not expected that Hannibal would even attempt the passage of the Alps, or if he did attempt it, that he could escape utter destruction. He was immensely astonished at his courage and adventurous daring when he heard that he had not only got safe a cross, but was actually besieging certain towns in Italy. The Roman government was typically slow-moving and the speed of Hannibal's attack had stunned them. Scarcely had the last rumor about the taking of Saguntum by the Carthaginians ceased to attract attention, then news came that Hannibal had arrived in Italy with his army. What made matters worse was that Hannibal was now recruiting allies from the Cis-Alpine Gauls in the foothills of the Alps, Celtic tribes on the Italian side of the mountains who had fought with the Romans before. The Roman senate went into a panic. They brought up reinforcements from Sicily, from an army that at that moment had been preparing to invade Africa. The general Sempronius Longus led this army of more than 40,000 to intercept Hannibal's forces in northern Italy. They met at the Battle of Trebia in December of the year 218 BC, and here Hannibal's powerful and determined forces utterly smashed the Roman army, killing at least 20,000 soldiers. When news of this defeat reached Rome, the mood in the senate must have been bleak. Hannibal marched south and crossed. the Apennine Mountains that run down the center of Italy and crush another Roman army on the shore of Lake Trasimene, killing another 15,000 Romans and capturing 10,000 prisoners. From there, his march seemed to be unstoppable. Hannibal would rampage across Italy for a total of 15 years. Chastened by their defeats, the Romans now avoided any battles with him, trying instead to suffocate his army and cut off his supplies. They even resorted to a scorched earth campaign in which they burned their own countryside in a desperate attempt to starve Hannibal's troops. Hannibal's strategy was to march south, hoping that the conquered Greek cities of southern Italy would greet him as a liberator and throw off the rule of their Roman masters. But the journey was hard. On his way, all but the largest of his elephants would die as a result of the harsh Italian winter, and while riding through the marshes of central Italy, Hannibal himself caught an infection that caused the loss of one of his eyes. When he reached southern Italy, he seized a vast supply depot at the town of Cannae, and the Roman senate realized that their strategy of suffocating him wouldn't work. They ordered a vast army to be drawn up, 86,000 soldiers, the largest that had ever been raised in Roman history. With this force, they sent the best and brightest of Roman society to march south to meet Hannibal at Cannae. Hannibal, now frustrated with these months without a battle, was all too eager to accept. Once again, the Roman army was utterly smashed, and the defeat was so total that even high members of Roman society were slaughtered on the battlefield. Livy describes the aftermath. It is said that 45,500 foot and 2,700 horse were slain in an almost equal proportion of citizens and allies. In the number were the quaestors of both consuls and 29 military tribunes, some of consular rank, some of praetorian, and besides these, 80 senators or men who had held offices which would have given them the right to be elected to the senate, but had volunteered to serve as soldiers in the legions. The prisoners taken in this battle are said to have numbered 3,000 foot soldiers and 1,500 horsemen. When news of this staggering defeat reached Rome, the city went into a panic. The people of Rome began seeing evil omens and portents everywhere. One senator was dispatched to Greece to consult the oracle at Delphi, and as the Carthaginians had once done under threat by Agathocles, the Romans resorted to rituals of human sacrifice to appease their angry gods, as Livy describes. By the direction of the books of fate, some unusual sacrifices were offered. Amongst others, a Gaulish man and woman and a Greek man and woman were buried alive in the cattle market, in a place walled in with stone, which even before this time had been defiled with human victims, a sacrifice wholly alien to the Roman spirit. To raise a new army, the Romans reduced the age of boys that were allowed to serve in the military to 17, and began enlisting criminals, those with crushing debts, and even slaves. But their situation looked bleak. After the Battle of Cannae, many of the old Greek cities of southern Italy began to join Hannibal and rebel against Rome. Sicily looked like it could break free, too, and for the next 11 years, war would rage all over southern Italy. In the year 211 BC, Hannibal even marched against Rome itself, causing great panic in the city. But like the Greek king Pyrrhus before him, Hannibal saw no hope of breaching the city's imposing Servian walls. The Carthaginian Senate made several attempts to open up a new front in this war, and capitalize on Hannibal's stunning success. They sent armies into northern Italy and Sicily, hoping to regain
some of their former territories, but none of their other generals had the same ability, and these attempts all ended in defeat. Rome now realized that trying to stop Hannibal was useless, and the only way they could turn the tide of this war was to attack Carthage in return. They sent one army into Spain, led by a general named Publius Cornelius Scipio, who had been among the few survivors of the Battle of Cannae, and he was remarkably successful. In the year 209 BC, in a devastating blow, Scipio managed to capture the Spanish capital of New Carthage. Three years later, he defeated the last remaining Carthaginian army in Spain, essentially seizing the entire province and its abundant silver mines for Rome. Despite everything Hannibal had achieved, the war was starting to turn in Rome's favor. Four years later in 205 BC, with Hannibal still rampaging in Italy, the Romans gave Scipio command of the armies of Sicily and ordered him to set sail for Africa to bring this war to the gates of Carthage itself. After a year of preparation, Scipio set sail in 204 BC. Faced with this invasion that could behead his entire society, Hannibal was forced to take his army and leave Italy to hurry back to Carthage and defend the city, as the Roman poet Sileus Italicus renders it. Carthage, with all her limbs severed, now dependent on a single man. Only the name of Hannibal prevented her great realm from sliding into utter ruin. Envoys promptly set sail, crossing the sea to recall him, with a plea from his country warning that, should he choose to linger, the city of Carthage might exist no more. Hannibal marshaled all the forces of Carthage and met Publius Scipio in North Africa in October of the year 202 BC at a place called Zama. Here on the eve of battle, Scipio and Hannibal finally met for the first time, and Hannibal seems to have presented a dejected, weary face, as Polybius writes. The next day, both commanders advanced from their camps, attended by a few horsemen. Presently, they left these escorts and met in the intervening space by themselves, each accompanied by an interpreter. Hannibal was the first to speak. After the usual salutation, he said that he wished that the Romans had never coveted any possession outside Italy, nor the Carthaginians outside Libya. To this battle, Hannibal brought 80 elephants from the stables of Carthage. But recently, one of Carthage's most important allies, the kingdom of Numidia to their west, had seen the writing on the wall and had switched sides, declaring for Rome. For centuries, Numidia had provided Carthage with its crucial cavalry, and now Carthage found itself facing these same Numidian horsemen on the battlefield. On top of this, the Romans had developed new tactics to neutralize Carthage's great strength, the fearsome war elephants. When the battle began, the elephants of Carthage charged, but the Roman lines opened up to swallow them, containing them with spears and pelting them with javelins. These animals panicked and stampeded back through the Carthaginian lines. In the chaos, the Numidian cavalry now fighting with the Romans swung into the rear of the Carthaginian ranks, and Hannibal's army was driven from the field. He only narrowly escaped with his life. After 17 long years of war, Carthage was once again decisively defeated. After the years of the destruction that Hannibal had wrought in Italy, Rome was in no mood to be lenient. They forced Carthage to sign an even more crushing peace treaty than the first. All of its overseas territories in Spain and elsewhere were stripped away from it, and many of its lands in North Africa were handed over to the Numidians. Carthage was ordered to pay more than 370 tons of silver, nearly five times the amount they had paid after the First Punic War. The treaty also aimed to destroy Carthage's ability to wage war in the future. It banned them from keeping any war elephants, all of which were handed over to the Romans, and restricted the size of their fleet to only ten ships, barely enough to even protect them from pirates. The rest of the Carthaginian navy was burned in its port. The Roman poet Sileus Italicus describes the scene. Then Carthage witnessed a dreadful sight, her fleet being set ablaze, the waves aglow with the sudden conflagration, while Nereus, lord of the ocean, trembled at the glare. The Carthaginians were restricted from declaring war anywhere outside of Africa, and only in Africa if they got the permission of Rome first. The new political situation was clear. Carthage was now entirely subservient to Rome. Hannibal would live for another 20 years after the Battle of Zama, although he would go into exile in the east, retiring to Tyre, the mother city of Carthage, and then to the Seleucid Empire and Armenia. The writer Pausanias claims that he died when he cut his finger on his drawn sword and developed septicemia from the wound. Other more dramatic stories describe him taking poison when he finds his dwelling place surrounded by soldiers loyal to the Romans come to capture him and take him back to Rome in chains. The Second Punic War was over, and once more, peace returned to that part of the Mediterranean that would last for another 50 years. During this time, despite its diminished situation, Carthage continued to flourish. Ironically, it seemed to do them good to be freed from the responsibilities of defending far-flung colonies and territories that for centuries had drained their treasury. Nothing about the war had changed the city's central role in the network of Mediterranean trade. Money still flowed into it from all corners of the sea, so much so that the Carthaginians offered to pay off the entirety of the reparations they owed to Rome just ten years after the end of the war, when the treaty had given them 50 years to pay it. Some of the largest and grandest buildings in Carthage were constructed during these decades after the Second Punic War. For the people of the city, it must have been a time of renewed hope as the wounds of the long conflict began to heal. But their diminished political situation did have its downsides. Banned from declaring war without Roman permission, Carthage repeatedly found itself defenceless against ambitious rivals in North Africa, and one of these was the new Roman ally and king of Numidia named Massinissa. Massinissa was the king who had betrayed the Carthaginians before the Battle of Zama, sending his powerful Numidian cavalry to fight for the Romans, and possibly tipping the entire battle in their favor. As a result, he had lived a long and prosperous life. He was now at the age of 86, and his long reign had seen Numidia break free of Carthage and become a North African power in its own right, and a loyal ally of Rome. Masinissa wasn't content with this and he always coveted more land for his growing kingdom. With the power of Rome now backing him and Carthage's hands tied behind its back, he repeatedly moved to seize wealthy pieces of land from the weakened former empire. The Carthaginians, bound by their treaty, had to appeal to the Romans to allow them to defend themselves. But Rome considered Masinissa a crucial ally and they always ruled in his favor. Carthage was like a great stricken whale, slowly being eaten alive by sharks. In the year 152 BC, half a century after the end of the Second Punic War, the Numidian king Masinissa seized a particularly rich tract of farmland that had belonged to Carthage for centuries. The Carthaginians were understandably upset, as the Roman historian Appian writes. Not long afterward, Masinissa raised a dispute about the land known as the big fields and the country belonging to 50 towns which is called Tisca. Again, the Carthaginians had recourse to the Romans. Again, the latter promised to send envoys to arbitrate the matter, but they delayed until it seemed probable that the Carthaginian interests would be utterly ruined. Rome finally agreed to send a delegation to Carthage to mediate this dispute. One of the men sent as part of this delegation was an irascible Roman senator by the name of Cato the Elder. Cato at this time was 81 years old and had spent much of his time in the Senate railing against what he perceived as the increasingly loose morals of Roman society. As a young man, he had fought against the armies of Hannibal in Italy, and as a result, he had grown to utterly detest the Carthaginians and everything they stood for. When he arrived in Carthage, Cato expected to find the city a barbarian backwater, impoverished by its two subsequent defeats at the hands of Rome. But what he found horrified him. Carthage was a booming city that seemed to be doing better than ever, and to his shock, the visible wealth of the city seemed to outdo that of Rome itself. In Plutarch's biography of Cato, he describes the old senator's reaction. The city was by no means in a poor and lowly state, as the Romans supposed, but rather teeming with vigorous fighting men, overflowing with enormous wealth, filled with arms of every sort and with military supplies, and more than a little emboldened by all this. The writer Appian records another version of this moment as the senators rode through the wealthy landscape outside the city. They carefully observed the country.