After killing Geryon, Hercules takes his cattle and herds them all the way back home to Greece in a meandering route that took him from Spain through southern France and over the soaring snowy mountains of the Alps, and on into Italy as Diodorus recounts. Hercules then made his way to Italy. As he traversed the mountain pass through the Alps, he made a highway out of the route which was rough and almost impassable. The barbarians who had inhabited this mountain region had been accustomed to butcher and to plunder such armies as passed through when they came to the difficult portions of the way, but he subdued them all. The story of Hercules bringing these cattle from Spain over these mountains was the dramatic pinnacle of a series of myths that would become known as the Heraclean Way. It was a series of stories that would be told to countless generations of Greek settlers, and then to the children of the Romans who followed them. As the Phoenician hero-god Melkart became increasingly associated with Hercules in later years, these stories would also be told to the children of Carthage. With stories of this wandering hero on their lips, the Greek settlements in eastern Sicily grew. For several centuries, they maintained an uneasy peace with the Carthaginian colonies in the west of the island. But as both powers began to acquire greater amounts of land, they would soon find themselves on a collision course. The exact dating and details of these wars is still fiercely contested, but it's clear that by the late 5th century BC, Sicily had erupted in warfare between Carthage and the Greeks. Soon, it would resemble a piece of meat being torn apart by two hungry dogs. The economy of the island suffered, warlords established themselves as the tyrant rulers of its cities, and banditry and lawlessness spread. For much of these centuries of fighting, the Carthaginians were happy to let the wars with the Greeks simmer on. The citizens of its capital never
went to war, and so long as the peace and comfort of their city was never disturbed, it must have felt to them that these wars were a very long way from home. But the final episode of these conflicts, known as the Seventh Sicilian War, would puncture this sense of invulnerability. That's because Carthage would find itself in a life-or-death struggle with a man who would bring the war home to their shores in dramatic fashion. He was a king of Syracuse, a Greek city-state on the southeastern coast of Sicily, and his name was Agathocles. Agathocles began life as a commoner in the Sicilian colonies, the son of a potter in the port city of Syracuse. At first, he learned his father's trade but soon entered the army and rose through its ranks, until he was able to enact a military coup and seize the throne of the city in the year 317 BC. Agathocles had a high opinion of himself, and as the tyrant of Syracuse, he minted silver coins that portrayed himself as the heir to Alexander the Great, the greatest of all the Greeks. Like Alexander, Agathocles had dreams of conquest. He soon set about subjugating cities all around him, as the historian Diodorus of Sicily recalls. Agathocles began unhampered to subject the cities and strongholds to himself. Mastering many of them quickly, he made his power secure. In fact, he built up for himself a host of allies, ample revenues, and a considerable army. He had picked a mercenary force comprising 10,000 foot soldiers and 3,500 horse. Moreover, he prepared a store of weapons and of missiles of all kinds, since he knew that the Carthaginians would shortly wage war against him. As predicted, it wasn't long before the Carthaginians began to see Agathocles as a serious threat. Carthage amassed a huge army in its usual way, gathering mercenaries and levies from all of its territories and allies, slingers, spearmen, cavalry, elephants, likely speaking a dozen different languages, and sailed all of them to Sicily. On the way, many of their ships were wrecked in a storm, but the force that arrived was still easily enough to overpower the tyrant Agathocles, as Diodorus recounts. As Agathocles saw the forces of the Carthaginians were superior to his own, he surmised that not a few of the strongholds could go over to the Phoenicians, and also those of the cities that were offended with him. After a stinging defeat on the Haimara River in central Sicily, Agathocles retreated east to his port capital of Syracuse, where the Carthaginians surrounded the city and laid siege. For Agathocles, it looks like all hope was lost. But it's here in this desperate moment that he decided on a truly daring course of action. He hatched a plan to break free of the siege by ship, set sail for Africa, and make a desperate strike at the heart of his enemy, the city of Carthage itself. When he saw that all his allies had changed sides and that barbarians were masters of almost all Sicily except Syracuse and were far superior in both land and sea forces, he carried out an undertaking that was unexpected and most reckless. He determined to leave an adequate garrison for the city, to select those of the soldiers who were fit, and with these to cross over into Libya. For he hoped that if he did this, those in Carthage who had been living luxuriously in long continued peace, and were therefore without experience in the dangers of battle, would easily be defeated. When the Carthaginians saw the Greek fleet leaving Syracuse, they believed Agathocles to be fleeing, and they pursued him. They chased the Greeks, harrying them across the sea for hundreds of kilometers, pelting them with arrows and slingstones. But luck was on the side of the Greeks, and Agathocles
Agathocles and his soldiers were able to land on the beaches of Africa. Agathocles must have feared that his soldiers would lose courage and attempt to flee, and so he ordered their ships to be burned in an offering to the gods, as Diodorus recounts. Standing by the stern, he bade the others also to follow his example. Then as all the captains threw in the fire and the flames quickly blazed high, the trumpeters sounded the signal for battle and the army raised the war cry, while all together prayed for a safe return home. This Agathocles did, for it was clear that if the retreat to the ships was cut off, in victory alone would they have hope for safety. Nevertheless, when all the ships were aflame and the fire was spreading widely, terror laid hold upon the Sicilians, as they considered the vastness of the sea that separated them from home. From the city walls of Carthage, the fires of the burning ships would have been visible on the horizon, and now fear was beginning to spread among its citizens. For them, war was something that happened in other places. The city had never been significantly threatened before, and there were virtually no forces there to defend it. Panic and great confusion seized upon the city. The crowds rushed to the marketplace and the Council of Elders consulted what should be done. In fact, there was no army at hand that could take the field against the enemy. The mass of the citizens who had no experience in warfare were already in despair, and the enemy was thought to be near the walls. For the first time, the citizens of Carthage would actually have to fight. They were conscripted en masse, given long spears and shields, perhaps given some rudimentary training, and along with the small complement of city guards, marched out to meet the Greeks in battle. The Carthaginians hoped to make up for the poor quality of their citizen troops with sheer numbers, and vastly outnumbering Agathocles, they were confident of victory. But that was not to be the case. When they met, the experienced and now desperate Greeks smashed the citizen soldiers of Carthage, ran them off the battlefield, and flooded into their camp. And here, Diodorus writes that they made a telling discovery. In the camp of the Carthaginians were found, along with other goods, many wagons in which were being transported, more than 20,000 pairs of manacles. For the Carthaginians, having expected to master the Greeks easily, had passed the word along among themselves to take alive as many possible, and after shackling them, to throw them into slave pens. With this army defeated, the city of Carthage was now completely surrounded by hostile forces, and Diodorus can't help but comment on the ridiculous nature of the situation. In Sicily, the Carthaginians who had defeated Agathocles in a great battle were besieging Syracuse, but in Libya, Agathocles had brought the Carthaginians under siege. It's here that the Carthaginians, in their desperation, seem to have turned to an ancient ritual that forms one of the darkest and most controversial aspects of their history, that is, the rite of child sacrifice. Human sacrifice was, at certain times, a feature of various societies in the ancient world. Rituals of this kind have been attested in several indigenous American societies and in the early histories of Israel and Judah, as well as the cities of Phoenicia like Tyre and Sidon. The Book of Kings records one king of the Levantine kingdom of Moab sacrificing his firstborn child when a war isn't going his way. In Ireland, Britain, and northern Germany during the Iron Age, sacrificial victims were ritually strangled and cast into bogs where the acidic waters mummified them in a state of perfect preservation. This idea of a deadly exchange with the gods seems to be one that recurs in human psychology and has independently arisen in multiple cultures. The idea that if we want to ask the gods for a great favor, we have to give them something truly precious in exchange. change, and what could be more precious than a human life. With the writing down of the Hebrew Bible and the law codes of Moses, this practice was condemned and outlawed in much of the Levant, and from then on, animals were sacrificed in the place of human victims. In Tyre and other Phoenician cities, the practice also seems to have died out in the first millennium. But there is one place it seems to have continued well into the second century BC, and that is Carthage. These were violent times when human life was cheap, but even so, these rituals were mentioned with some revulsion by several ancient writers, among them the Greek philosopher Plato. With us, for instance, human sacrifice is not legal but unholy, whereas the Carthaginians perform it as a thing they account wholly illegal, and that too when some of them even sacrifice their own sons. At first, these rituals seem to have been an authentic sacrifice, giving up the life of one of your own children in the hope of receiving favor from the gods. But before long, wealthy Carthaginians found a way around this. In fact, they seem to have developed a macabre industry, a trade in other people's children for sacrifice. The writer Plutarch describes this system and gives a sense for the atmosphere of these grisly rituals. Those who had no children would buy little ones from poor people and cut their throats as if they were so many lambs or young birds. Meanwhile, the mother stood by without a tear or moan. But should she utter a single moan or let fall a single tear, she had to forfeit the money, and her child was sacrificed nevertheless. The whole area before the statue was filled with a loud noise of flutes and drums so that the cries of wailing should not reach the ears of the people. For a long time, it was assumed that these stories were exaggerations, pieces of Greek propaganda designed to demonize their enemies in Carthage. But more modern archaeological discoveries have more or less confirmed that child sacrifice did take place, at least at some times and at least by some people in the city. Large collections of buried urns containing the cremated remains of children have been found in large temple sites known as tofets. Some of these temples are exceedingly large, with collections of cremation urns exceeding 2,000 in number. Archaeology has uncovered masks and symbols at these sites, incense burners, and other paraphernalia of ritual, suggesting that the ceremonies were highly structured. It is worth being cautious with these findings. At most of the sites, analysis has shown that the vast majority of these children's remains are of stillborn babies, or babies that had died of natural causes. At a time when child mortality has been estimated at around 30 to 40 percent, the Carthaginians may have considered the tragedy of infant death to be a kind of sacred sign, a human life being taken back by the gods, and the bodies of these children were burned in the tofets as a result. The relative lack of children's remains in the regular graveyards of the city seemed to show that these tofets were at least in part cremation sites for the remains of children who had died of other causes. But analysis of the ages of other remains at other times don't seem to fit with patterns of child mortality. However the ritual had begun, at least in the later years of the city, it had evolved into something much darker and crueler. The inscriptions at these later sites of sacrifice, left over the cremation urns, don't seem to leave much room for interpretation, as this typical example shows. To Lady Tinnit, face of Baal, and Lord Baal-Hamon, the thing that Arish, son of Barashtot, son of Baal-Shelem, maker of strigils, vowed because the lord heard his voice. There are countless of these inscriptions and they all follow this pattern. The child was not offered up front but was promised in advance if the gods came through on their request. The Greek historian
Cleitacus seems to confirm this order of events. The Phoenicians, and above all, the Carthaginians, whenever they were eager for a great thing to succeed, made a vow by one of their children. If they would receive the desired things, they would sacrifice to the gods. A bronze chronos, having been erected by them, stretched out upward hands over a bronze oven to burn the child. The flame of the burning child reached its body until the limbs, having shriveled up and smiling mouth, appeared to be almost laughing. It would slip into the oven. We can't imagine the kinds of things people might have asked for in exchange for these sacrifices. Perhaps in some instances, we can imagine the ritual was performed out of desperation, an extreme measure. Other times, perhaps the wishes were trivial. Good weather on a journey, maybe. Good fortune and wealth in the year to come, or the downfall of a business rival. Whatever their wish was, it seems that if it went on to come true, the child's fate would be sealed. With only fragmentary secondhand accounts and the little that can be gleaned from archaeological sites, we're left guessing about the questions that desperately need answers. How widespread this practice was in society, why and when people engaged in it, and how the majority of Carthaginian citizens felt about it. With the army of Agathocles drawing near and their last citizen defenders defeated in the field, the Carthaginians began to believe that their gods must be angry with them. At least some people in the city believed that it was this practice of sacrificing the children of the poor instead of their own that was to blame, as Diodorus of Sicily recounts. They also alleged that Cronus had turned against them, as in former times they had been accustomed to sacrifice to this god the noblest of their sons. But more recently, secretly buying and nurturing children, they had sent these to the sacrifice. When they had given thought to these things and saw their enemy encamped before their walls, they were filled with superstitious dread, for they believed that they had neglected the honors of the gods that had been established by their fathers. In their zeal to make amends for their omission, they selected 200 of the noblest children and sacrificed them publicly, and others who were under suspicion sacrificed themselves voluntarily in number not less than 300. In this time of peril, the citizens of Carthage reverted to a kind of suicidal religious fundamentalism, but this would not be the end of the city. Agathocles rampaged around the countryside of Carthage for years, but the city's formidable triple-wall defenses would keep him at bay, and soon the Greek king ran out of steam. In his absence, some of his Sicilian vassals were taking the opportunity to declare independence. He hurried back home, leaving his inexperienced son in charge of his army, who was easily outmaneuvered by Carthaginian generals. By the time Agathocles returned to Africa, he saw that the situation had become untenable, and he fled back home to Sicily. But his achievements had been significant. He had left a lasting impression on the people of Carthage, laid waste to their countryside, terrified them so deeply that they had slaughtered their own children, and likely left them on the brink of bankruptcy. A peace treaty in 307 BC essentially returned the situation to exactly how it had been before the war started. The example of Agathocles, of a daring strike at the heart of your enemy right at the moment they least expect it, was an example that later Carthaginian generals would remember and learn from. But it was also an episode that other powers in the region paid particular attention to. Carthage had once been considered the region's major power, but a small Greek army had come within a hair's breadth of bringing it to its knees. The historian Plutarch puts it bluntly in the mouth of one of his characters. For who could keep his hands off Libya or Carthage when that city got within his reach, a city which Agathocles, slipping stealthily out of Syracuse and crossing the
with only a few ships, narrowly mistaking. The first who would seek to take advantage of this perceived weakness was a Greek king named Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus was the king of the Greek kingdom of Epirus, around what is today southern Albania. His name meant fiery or red-haired, coming from the same root as the English word pyre. Plutarch recalls that he seems to have suffered from some kind of developmental disorder that fused together the teeth of his upper jaw, giving him an unsettling look. In the aspect of his countenance, Pyrrhus had more of the terror than of the majesty of kingly power. He had not many teeth, but his upper jaw was one continuous bone on which the usual intervals between the teeth were indicated by slight depressions. Just like Agathocles, Pyrrhus had an immensely high opinion of himself, and fancied himself as the inheritor of the legacy of Alexander. In his later life, he styled himself as a hero of the Hellenic world, the defender of everything Greek. Right at that moment, the Greeks who needed the most defending were the beleaguered colonies in southern Italy, the region known as Megali Halas or Greater Greece. These city-states were suddenly being menaced by a powerful new force in the region, a people from the river plains of central Italy that the Greeks considered to be barbarians, and that had recently emerged as something of a regional superpower. This was the once small and insignificant city-state republic of Rome. Throughout the 4th century BC, this bizarre republic had begun expanding into the hinterlands of its region of Latium and brought a number of other cities under its control. From there, they had managed to upset the power balance of central Italy and toppled a number of well-established rivals, absorbing all of Latium and the region of Campania. Wherever they went, the Romans took a remarkably clever and pragmatic approach to absorbing other peoples into their society. While empires like Carthage kept full citizenship only for the people living in their home city, Rome was far more generous with citizenship. Unlike the armies of Carthage, Rome's legions were made up of citizen-soldiers, and with every free man now a citizen, they were able to draw on vast reserves of manpower. As Rome grew in size and influence, Carthage took notice. About 160 years after the first treaty they had signed, they penned a new expanded agreement with Rome. This new treaty added the condition that Rome would not try to found any cities in Carthaginian territory, suggesting that Roman expansion had become at least a small concern for the region's major power. But for the most part, relations between Rome and Carthage were friendly if suspicious. Carthage welcomed the rise of Rome as a potential ally against their mutual enemies, the Greeks. One district of the city of Rome was known as the Vicus Africus or African Quarter, suggesting that a population of Carthaginian merchants already lived and traded in the city. It seems Carthage viewed Rome not as an unwelcome rival, but as a new potential source of customers. But for the Greek colonies of southern Italy, Rome was a voracious new predator. As Roman power expanded, the Greeks found themselves surrounded, and many of them began sending out letters of distress to the fiery Greek king Pyrrhus. One of these colonies was the city of Tarentum, as Plutarch recalls.