They saw how diligently it was cultivated and what great estates it possessed. They entered the city and saw how greatly it had increased in wealth and population since its overthrow by Scipio not long before. When they returned to Rome, they declared that Carthage was to them an object of apprehension rather than of jealousy, the city being so ill-affected, so near to them, and growing so rapidly. The old senator Cato was shaken by his experience. From then, he would dedicate the final years of his life to a single cause. Now, at every debate in the Senate, Cato would end every one of his statements, whether on the price of grain or the wars in Gaul, whether on the appointment of new consuls, or the response to a flood in the south with a single phrase, Seterum senseo Carthago delenda est. Furthermore, I believe Carthage must be destroyed. Many in the Roman Senate were starting to agree with him. Finally, a year after Cato's visit to Carthage, the Carthaginians had had enough of the Numidian king Massinissa taking advantage of their situation. They sent an army of
50,000 men to seize back some of the farmland that he had taken. But their army was decisively defeated by the Numidians. Carthage's last attempt to defend itself had been a failure, but to the Romans, it was also a breach of their treaty, and it was enough of a pretext to go to war one final time, to destroy their old rival for good. In the year 149 BC, the old Phoenician city of Utica seems to have felt the change in the winds. They also changed allegiances, declaring their loyalty to Rome. In the same year, a large Roman army used the port of Utica to land in North Africa and prepared to march on the city of Carthage. At news of this army landing, the Carthaginians were distraught. They sent envoys to meet the Romans, and when they arrived, the Romans demanded that the city be completely demilitarized and hand over all of their military equipment. The Carthaginians complied. They came back with every piece of armor and weaponry they could find, offering their total surrender. With the Roman general sitting over them on his high seat, they pleaded with the Romans not to go to war. Carthage was now completely disarmed, and in response, the Romans offered them peace on one condition, but it was a condition so absurd that even they must have known it would be rejected. They demanded that the Carthaginians abandoned their city so that it could be demolished in its entirety, and moved 16 kilometers or so inland and away from the sea. Appian recounts these Roman demands. Censorinus rose and with a stern countenance spoke, yield Carthage to us and betake yourselves where you like within your own territory, at a distance of at least 10 miles from the sea, for we are resolved to raise your city to the ground. Such a task would be virtually impossible, and of course, for the seagoing Phoenicians of Carthage, would have essentially ended their livelihoods for good. Moving the city would have meant abandoning their temples, the cemeteries where their ancestors were buried, every street and corner that they knew. Appian records the outpouring of grief as the Carthaginians were informed of the Roman plans. While he was yet speaking, the Carthaginians lifted their hands toward heaven with loud cries and called on the gods. They flung themselves on the ground and beat it with their hands and heads. Some of them even tore their clothes and lacerated their flesh as though they were absolutely bereft of their senses. After the first frenzy was passed, there was great silence and prostration as of men lying dead. So pitiable was this mingling together of public and private grief that it drew tears from the Romans themselves. The Carthaginians withdrew to their city and the entire civilian population prepared to withstand their attackers. The historian Appian summarizes the dire situation that the citizens of Carthage faced. They reflected that their city was without arms, that it was empty of defenders, that it had not a ship, not a catapult, not a javelin, not a sword, nor a sufficient number of fighting men. They had neither mercenaries, nor friends, nor allies, nor time to procure any. Their enemies were in possession of their children, their arms, and their territory. Their city was besieged by foes provided with ships, infantry, cavalry, and engines, while Massinissa, their other enemy, was on their flank. But the city was still a formidable fortress. Its triple line of defensive walls could withstand any assault, and it had complex systems for gathering rainwater and storing it in vast cisterns, allowing it to maintain a continuous supply of fresh drinking water. The Romans settled in for a siege. but soon found it to be much more difficult than they had expected. They controlled the seas, but swift Carthaginian sailors were still able to smuggle food into the city's harbor at night. The Romans tried again and again to storm the city walls, but each time they were fought back by the citizens, now fighting tooth and nail for their survival with every tool and improvised weapon they could find, as Appian recounts. All the sacred places, the temples and every other unoccupied space were turned into workshops where men and women worked together day and night without pause, taking their food by turns on a fixed schedule. Each day they made a hundred shields, three hundred swords, a thousand missiles for catapults, five hundred darts and javelins, and as many catapults as they could. For strings to bend them, the women cut off their hair for want of other fibers. The siege of Carthage went on for three years. In the year 147, command of the besieging army was given to a new consul, in fact the 36-year-old adopted grandson of the great Publius Scipio, who had beat Hannibal at the Battle of Zama some 50 years earlier, a man named Scipio Aemilianus. With him came his personal friend and official documenter of the expedition, the Greek historian Polybius, who writes this part of his history as an eyewitness. Infuriated at the smugglers still supplying the besieged city, the Roman general Scipio ordered a vast stone barrier to be built in the mouth of Carthage's harbor, blocking any further attempts to resupply it. Food became scarce in the city, but still the defenders struggled on. But in the spring of the year 146 BC, the spirit of the Carthaginians was exhausted. Scipio launched a full-scale assault of the city from the area of the harbor, and the great wars of Carthage were finally breached. The Roman legions poured into the city and began to massacre every person they could find. Appian described the scenes that followed. Then came new scenes of horror. As the fire spread and carried everything down, the soldiers did not wait to destroy the buildings little by little, but all in a heap. So the crashing grew louder, and many corpses fell with the stones into the midst. Others were seen still living, especially old men, women, and young children who had hidden in the inmost nooks of the houses, some of them wounded, some more or less burned, and uttering piteous cries. Still others, thrust out and falling from such a height with the stones, timbers, and fire, were torn asunder in all shapes of horror, crushed and mangled. Trenches were filled with men. The tug of war, the glory of approaching victory, the rush of the soldiery, the orders of the officers, the blast of the trumpets, tribunes and centurions marching their cohorts hither and thither, all together made everybody frantic and heedless of the spectacles under their eyes. The slaughter of Carthage's citizens went on for six days, during which it's thought that an estimated 60,000 people were put to the sword. The Roman general Scipio set his soldiers to work in shifts so that they would not become tired of the killing, and on the seventh day, Scipio ordered his soldiers to begin taking prisoners. From this point, a further 50,000 Carthaginians were rounded up and sold into slavery. From there, they would be sold and dispersed to all corners of the Roman Republic. Carthage was burned to the ground and demolished brick by brick. Some Carthaginians held out for some time in the citadel of Birsa, the fortified hill on which legend has it that Elishaia once cut apart her oxhide at the city's founding. According to Appian, when the Carthaginian general Hasdrupal finally surrendered, his wife set fire to the main temple and climbed upon its roof. Just like the
figure of Elishaia, she then cast herself and her children into the flames. It is said that as the fire was lighted, the wife of Hasdrubal, in full view of Scipio, arrayed in the best attire possible under such circumstances and with her children by her side, said in Scipio's hearing, For you, Roman, the gods have no cause of indignation, since you exercise the right of war. Upon this Hasdrubal, betrayer of his country and her temples, of me and his children, may the gods of Carthage take vengeance, and you be their instrument. Having reproached him thus, she slew her children, flung them into the fire and plunged in after them. Such, they say, was the death of the wife of Hasdrubal. The historian Polybius, who accompanied Scipio throughout the entire siege, writes with little detail about what unfolded. But he does note that in the moment of his victory, the Roman general turned to him and said something strange. In the burning ruins of Carthage, Scipio Aemilianus seems to have felt a spark of apprehension, a sudden fear or realization that one day the same fate might befall his own great city of Rome. Turning round to me at once and grasping my hand, Scipio said, A glorious moment, Polybius, but I have a dread foreboding that someday the same doom will be pronounced on my own country. It would be difficult to mention an utterance more statement-like and more profound. At the moment of our greatest triumph and of disaster to our enemies, to bear in mind at the season of success the mutability of fortune. Appian records that Scipio is said to have wept at the sight of Carthage burning, and that he recited a line from Homer's great epic, The Iliad, in which Andromache, the wife of Hector, laments the coming destruction of Troy. Scipio, beholding this city which had flourished 700 years from its foundation and had ruled over so many lands, islands, and seas, rich with arms and fleets, elephants and money, equal to the mightiest monarchies but far surpassing them in bravery and high spirit, now come to its end in total destruction. Scipio, beholding this spectacle, is said to have shed tears and publicly lamented the fortune of the enemy. After meditating by himself a long time and reflecting on the rise and fall of cities, nations, and empires, as well as of individuals upon the fate of Troy, that once proud city, upon that of the Assyrians, the Medes, and the Persians, greatest of all, and later the splendid Macedonian Empire, either voluntarily or otherwise, the words of the poet escaped his lips. The day shall come in which our sacred Troy and Priam, and the people whom spear-bearing Priam rules, shall perish all. But back in Rome, there was no such sense of foreboding. The city exploded in celebration at the news. When the people of Rome heard of the victory early in the evening, they poured into the streets and spent the whole night congratulating and embracing each other like people just now delivered from some great fear, just now confirmed in their worldwide supremacy, just now assured of the permanence of their own city, and winners of such a victory as never before. They talked about the height of the walls and the size of the stones. They pictured to each other the whole war as though it were just taking place under their own eyes. In the days that followed, ash would have settled over the charred ruins of Carthage. From its final victory in the Punic Wars, Rome would emerge as the only superpower left in the Mediterranean. The scattered Greek kingdoms that remained were one by one absorbed by it, and in the coming centuries, it would grow to encompass the entire shore of that sea, cover all but the farther stretches of Western Europe, and shape the
the entire course of European history. But Carthage would become just a name, a coin that had lost its value, an emblem of an age that had passed into nothing. After the carnage of the siege, the blackened ruins of the city were emptied of all life. But for the Romans, this still wasn't enough. In the years that followed, they sent further delegations to the city to systematically take it apart, piece by piece, to ensure that no population crept back to repopulate its ruins, that never again would their great rival resurface in North Africa. Some of the libraries and archives of Carthage survived the burning of the city. In these were kept the books of Carthaginian history, perhaps poetry and mythology, science and medicine, documents of the Phoenician voyages of discovery to the edges of the world. But all of these were taken by the Romans. Some were simply burned, while others were distributed among the Romans' African allies. As a result, not a single one of these works has survived. Today, scarcely a few documents written by a Carthaginian can be read, and no works of literature or history have come down to us. So, for the next 2,000 years, their story would be told by others. Their voices and their memory, just like their city, were completely erased. The territory of Carthage was absorbed into the new Roman province of Africa, and for the next hundred years, what remained of the ruins of Carthage were left to crumble into the sands, home to wild dogs, overgrown with scrub and weeds and marram grass, washed with salt from the sea air, the roost of gulls and crows. More than a century later, Rome would send a party of 3,000 colonists to the ruins of the shattered city, and they founded a Roman colony on the rubble. As they settled the area, the ruins of Carthage were themselves buried beneath a new Roman town that shared almost nothing of the city that had once stood there except its name, and even the ruins of the city as it had once been would soon be forgotten. Around the year 1835, the British statesman Sir Grenville Temple visited the ruins of Carthage and wrote the following description of his disappointment upon finding how little remained of that once great city. Early on the morning following, I walked to the site of the great Carthage, of that town at the sound of whose name mighty Rome herself had so often trembled. I was prepared to see but few vestiges of its former grandeur, but my heart sunk within me when ascending one of its hills, for I beheld nothing more than a few scattered and shapeless masses of masonry, its very name is now unknown to the present inhabitants. Buried in the silence of the grave, no living soul appearing, except occasionally a soldier going or returning from the fort, or the solitary and motionless figure of an Arab watching his flocks from the summit of the fragment of some former palace or temple. Solitude and silence hold sway over the whole scene, a scene which impresses on the mind a feeling of melancholy which I found difficult to shake off. Another person who visited these ruins was the English poet Letitia Elizabeth Landon, and I'd like to end the episode with her poem entitled Carthage. As you listen, imagine what it would feel like to watch the streets and temples of that city crumble and burn as 800 years of history is buried beneath ash and soot. Imagine every book that has ever been written. in your native language destroyed, and your people enslaved and scattered about the face of the earth. Imagine what it would feel like to see your own hometown disappear, emptied of all life and demolished brick by brick, then left empty until only a scattering of ruins remains. Lo, it lieth, earth to earth, all to which that earth gave birth, palace, market-street, and fane, dust that never asks in vain, hath reclaimed its own again. Dust, the wide world's king, where are now the glorious hours of a nation's gathered powers? Like the setting of a star in the fathomless afar, time's eternal wing hath around those ruins cast the dark presence of the past. Thou dost build thy home on sand, and the palace-girdled strand fadeth like a dream. Thy great victories only show all is nothingness below. Thank you once again for listening to the Fall of Civilizations podcast. I'd like to thank my voice actors for this episode, Michael Hagiantones, Lachlan Lucas, Alexandra Boulton, Simon Jackson, Tom Marshall Lee, Chris Harvey, Nick Denton, and Paul Cassell. Sound engineering was by Alexei Sibikin. I'd like to thank my historical advisor for this episode, Dr. Michael J. Taylor from the University of Albany. Original music was composed and produced by Pavlos Kapralos, featuring Sass Houri on percussion, Anastasia Papadopoulou on vocals, June Filetti on oboe, and on the oud and flute, Pavlos Kapralos. All original tracks composed for this episode will be available to download for all Patreon subscribers. A public list of all sources and recommended reading for this episode will also be available on Patreon. I love to hear your thoughts and responses on Twitter, so please come and tell me what you thought. You can follow me at PaulMMCooper. If you'd like updates about the podcast, announcements about new episodes, as well as images, maps, and reading suggestions, you can follow the podcast at fallofcivpod, with underscores separating the words. This podcast can only keep going with the support of our generous subscribers on Patreon. You help me cover my costs and help me keep the podcast ad-free. You also let me dedicate more time to researching, writing, recording, and editing to get the episodes out to you faster and bring as much life and detail to them as possible. I want to thank all my subscribers for making this happen. If you enjoyed this episode, please consider heading on to patreon.com forward slash fallofcivilizations underscore podcast, or just google Fall of Civilizations Patreon. That's P-A-T-R-E-O-N. For now, all the best, and thanks for listening.