Gardiz, however, is outside the Pillars. Here live the men who fit out the most and largest merchant vessels, both for our sea and the outer sea. They say the Tyrians believed that the two capes which formed the Strait were the ends of the inhabited world. A great ceremony known as the Ejercis, or awakening, was conducted each year in the temple of Gardiz. During this time, all foreigners were asked to leave the city and a great effigy of the god Melkart was set afloat on the sea and burned. Even this temple was a crucial part of the Phoenician trading system. The institution worked to guarantee the quality of metal ingots produced in Gardiz by giving them a special stamp and acted as a guarantor between merchants entering into contracts, with punishments promised from Melkart himself if any dared to go back on their word. With Phoenician trade increasingly drifting westward, the center of their power would soon also shift in that direction, to a place where they would finally be free of the overbearing empires constantly breathing down their necks. They would soon found a city on the shore of North Africa, right at the center of the Mediterranean world, a city that would become one of the largest and wealthiest on earth. That city would one day be known
as Carthage. Like so many aspects of our modern understanding of the Phoenicians, the name Carthage is itself a distortion filtered through the accounts of others. In Latin, the city was known as Carthago, while the Greeks called it Carcadon. But to its inhabitants, it was known as Carthadast, or in Phoenician, the new city. Like many great cities of its time, Carthage soon developed its own founding myth. It begins with a princess of Tyre named Elissa or Elishaia. In the legend, the king of Tyre promises that upon his death, his kingdom would be split between his two children, his daughter Elishaia and his son Pygmalion. But when the old king dies, the treacherous brother Pygmalion refuses to accept the splitting of the kingdom and moves to seize everything for himself, even killing Elishaia's husband to remove any potential rivals. Stricken with grief, Elishaia flees down to the docks along with a ragtag band of her royal guards and temple women, and there they set sail westwards and make for Africa. The Roman writer Justinus, drawing on an earlier Greek text, writes his rendition of this story, along with a cunning deception to slow down any greedy pursuers. Elissa put the attendants who were sent by the king to assist in her removal on board some vessels in the early part of the evening, and sailing out into the deep made them throw some loads of sand put up in sacks as if it was money into the sea. This group of refugees sail along the coast of North Africa until eventually they set ashore near the Phoenician colony of Utica. They camp on a nearby hill known as Birsa, and the king who rules there, a man named Yarbus, takes pity on them. But not too much pity. He offers to sell them a plot of land on the hill no bigger than an ox hide. But Elishaia is cunning. She cuts the ox hide into thin strips, lining them up to enclose the entire hill, a much larger area of land than the miserly king had intended. Bound by his word, Yarbus has no choice but to give them the land he promised, and so the city of Carthage is born. Justinus recounts the city's early flourishing. Carthage was founded, an annual tribute being fixed for the ground which it was to occupy. At the commencement of digging the foundations, an ox's head was found, which was an omen that the city would be wealthy indeed, but laborious and always enslaved. It was therefore removed to another place, where the head of a horse was found, which, indicating that the people would be warlike and powerful, portended an auspicious sight. In a short time, as the surrounding people came together at the report, the inhabitants became numerous, and the city itself extensive. From the hilltop of Birsa, the city grows and grows, soon eclipsing King Yarbus' town of Utica, which makes him understandably jealous. He demands that Elisha marry him so that he can absorb her flourishing town and everything she owns into his kingdom. If she refuses, he will burn Carthage to the ground. Faced with the choice of this capitulation or the destruction of her new city, Elisha builds a great pyre and climbs onto it, saying that she must indeed go to her husband, meaning not Yarbus but the man her brother had killed on the other side of the sea, waiting for her in the afterlife. This tragic but noble self-sacrifice has proven irresistible to generations of poets, and the Roman poet Virgil gives one rendition of this scene. When the pyre of cut pine and oak was raised high in an innermost court open to the sky, the queen hung the place with garlands and wreathed it with funereal foliage. She laid his sword and clothes and picture on the bed. She lingered a while, in tears and thought, then cast herself on the bed and spoke her last words. words, accept this soul and loose me from my sorrows. In honor of Elishaia's sacrifice, her people gave her the title of Dido, meaning female warrior or heroine, and this is the name by which she would be known to later Roman writers. This Baroque tale of love and tragedy has all the hallmarks of ancient literature and we can't assume that it bears any relationship to what actually happened. Some details of the tale do accord with what archaeology tells us, that the Carthaginian Phoenicians drew their origins back to the city of Tyre and that the city was founded close to the older settlement of Utica which it soon eclipsed in size. But perhaps more important than any of this is the sense that this founding myth might give us of the way the Carthaginians thought of themselves and their city's place in the world. As a city of survivors who had found refuge here on the North African coast, a city of sailors and adventurers, they were resourceful and drove a hard bargain. They were clever, fond of outwitting their enemies, always finding a way to make a little go a long way, and also, perhaps, that they would die before they gave up their freedom. Regardless of the truth of its origins, it's clear from archaeology that after its founding in the 8th century BC, the new colony of Carthage did grow exceptionally quickly. In many ways, it was the perfect Phoenician settlement. Carthage was built in a small bay that itself belonged to a vast natural harbour known today as the Bay of Tunis. The city sat on top of a series of sheer red cliffs that look down over the glittering blue waters of the Mediterranean in the north. It was also easily defended on its landward side where a range of rocky hills and a number of lakes and saltwater lagoons break the land into a series of narrow approaches, protecting the city from any would-be attackers. The Roman writer Appian writes one description of the city's location. The city lay in a recess of a great gulf and was in the form of a peninsula. It was separated from the mainland by an isthmus about five kilometers in width. From this isthmus, a narrow and longish tongue of land, about a kilometer wide, extended towards the west between a lake and the sea. Near to the site of Carthage flows a river known today as the Medgerda which originates in the high Atlas Mountains of North Africa. This river flows for 460 kilometers to the sea and brings crucial freshwater into the bay, turning the otherwise arid landscape green and providing water for drinking and for irrigation. As a result, the land here was abundant with wheat, grapes, olives, and dates. In the distance over the bay to the south rises the blue outline of the mountain Jebel Rassas, literally the Mountain of Lead, a rugged outcrop of Jurassic limestone climbing nearly 800 meters above the plain. The hot desert winds known as the Sirocco would blow in from the Sahara during the summer season, rattling the shutters on the windows and the leaves of the date palms. At the end of summer, thunderstorms would roll in from the sea. As well as its ideal geography, the city's location in the Mediterranean world was also perfect. Carthage sat at a crucial halfway point between the city of Tyre and the wealthy mines of Spain, but it was also only about 200 kilometers by boat from the island of Sicily and about 300 kilometers from Sardinia, two crucial sites of Phoenician industry that were only growing in importance. Pottery found in even the earliest layers of Carthage shows a huge range of styles coming from Greece, Italy, Spain, and all the Phoenician colonies. The Phoenician world was now a web, with Carthage sitting right at its center. The city in these early days must have been a humble site. Archaeology paints a picture of a simple collection of mud-brick buildings lining the seashore, but within a century, this had exploded. One graveyard
soon had to be moved in order to make space for a quarter filled with metal working workshops, and the settlers built a wall about three meters in height to protect their burgeoning town. Soon, more monumental buildings would be constructed. The Roman poet Virgil imagines the activity that must have accompanied the growth of this town from tiny settlement to booming city. Aeneas found where lately huts had been, marvelous buildings, gateways, cobbled ways, and din of wagons. There the Tyrians were hard at work, laying courses for walls, rolling up stones to build the citadel, while others picked out building sites and plowed a boundary furrow. Laws were being enacted, magistrates and a sacred Senate chosen. Here men were dredging harbors, there they laid the foundations of a theater, and quarried massive pillars. Other than what we can glean from archaeology, we know very little about the early history of Carthage. Apart from a few short inscriptions, no Carthaginian texts have survived into the modern day, and so in terms of written history, we have virtually complete silence from that part of the Mediterranean for the first 200 years or so of its existence, and beyond that, we have to rely on the writings of others. From the work of Greek writers, we learn that Carthage was a republic. It was ruled under a kind of oligarchic system governed by a council of its wealthiest citizens. The Greek philosopher Aristotle, writing in the 4th century, spoke approvingly of the Carthaginian system of government and compares it to that of the Greek city-state of Sparta. Carthage also appears to have a good constitution, with many outstanding features as compared with those of other nations, but most nearly resembling the Spartan in some points. Many regulations at Carthage are good, and a proof of a well-regulated constitution is that the populace willingly remain faithful to the constitutional system, and that neither civil strife has arisen in any degree worth mentioning, nor yet a tyrant. But Aristotle also warns that the Carthaginian system put too much emphasis on the wealth of its rulers rather than their competence, and expresses concerns that this could lead to corruption. Those who purchase their office will learn by degrees to make a profit out of it. The highest echelons of Carthaginian society were divided between the civil leaders, the shofotim or judges, and the rabim or generals, who took care of military matters. These highest positions, senators and the heads of committees, drew no salary for their work, and so they could realistically only be held by those who could support themselves on private incomes, usually successful merchants or wealthy landowners. But there was a certain fairness to this. There seems to have been no barrier other than wealth, and people from common backgrounds who became wealthy could quickly rise to the highest parts of government. Certain powerful families were constantly vying for the most powerful positions, but there was no hereditary royalty in Carthage. It's possible that the myth of Elishaia or Dido may have played a role in maintaining this situation, since according to the legend, the city was founded by a woman who had no children. No one could ever claim to be her true descendants or have any kind of ancestral right to rule. Instead, the city was governed by a number of different semi-democratic bodies made up of wealthy citizens. One of these was called the Tribunal of the 104, and another the Council of Elders, a kind of Senate. The highest executive position was held by two elected officers who ruled simultaneously and who were elected each year. The arrangement was complex and likely prone to corruption, but for the most part, it seems to have worked. have worked. While Carthage flourished, the Phoenician cities that had given birth to it began to flounder. Tyre and Sidon were still under the boot of Assyria, and around 670 BC, the Assyrian king Esarhaddon began to place harsh restrictions on who they could trade with. When Assyria went to war with Egypt, Esarhaddon forced the Phoenicians of Tyre to place a trade embargo on the Pharaohs. Without access to their once most lucrative market, these cities went into decline. Soon, the king of Tyre was not even allowed to open messages without an Assyrian official present, as the following surviving fragment of one treaty shows. "... Nor must you open a letter which I send you without the presence of the Royal deputy. If the Royal deputy is absent, wait for him and then open it. If a ship of the people of Tyre is shipwrecked off the coast of the land of the philistines or anywhere on the borders of Assyrian territory, everything that is on the ship belongs to Esarhaddon, king of Assyria." As a result of the decline of cities like Tyre and Sidon, it's likely that large numbers of Phoenicians would have fled to what was now the undisputed capital of the Phoenician world, the booming port town of Carthage. They brought with them their language, their knowledge, their gods, and their gold. By the 6th century BC, Carthage was one of the largest and wealthiest cities in the Mediterranean, and its sailors, the finest in the world, would soon embark on voyages of exploration that would not be matched for another 2,000 years. By this time, the Phoenicians had already sailed right to the end of their world, through the pillars of Hercules and out into the Atlantic Ocean. But their exploration didn't stop there. In fact, if ancient sources are to be believed, they may have been the first navigators to successfully sail around the entire coast of Africa. Herodotus recounts one expedition that supposedly took place around 600 BC, sponsored by a pharaoh of Egypt named Nekos, although he is frustratingly vague and short on detail. The expedition apparently set sail from Egypt's Red Sea coast, voyaged around the Horn of Africa and the South African Cape before sailing north through the Gulf of Guinea and back into the Mediterranean through the pillars of Hercules. Nekos of Egypt sent Phoenicians in ships, instructing them to sail on their return voyage past the pillars of Heraclith until they came into the Northern Sea, and so to Egypt. So, the Phoenicians set out from the Red Sea and sailed to the Southern Sea. Whenever autumn came, they would put in and plant the land in whatever part of Libya they had reached, and there await the harvest. Then, having gathered the crop, they sailed on, so that after two years had passed, it was in the third that they rounded the pillars of Heraclith and came to Egypt. There they said, what some may believe though I do not, that in sailing around Libya, they had the sun on their right hand. Interestingly, it is this detail that Herodotus personally finds unbelievable that has caused modern scholars to take the claim more seriously. The change in the position of the sun relative to the ship suggests that the voyage did indeed cross the Tropic of Cancer and perhaps even the equator, causing the summer sun to appear in the north. Modern estimates consider a journey time of three years to be a reasonable duration for a circumnavigation of Africa that would have been about 20,000 kilometers long, or half the way around the world. If this story is true, then it means the Phoenicians may have rounded the Cape of Africa more than 2,000 years before the Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias would do the same thing in 1488, opening up the passage to India and the age of European colonialism. More solidly attested voyages of Phoenician discovery
would see an explorer named Hanno the Navigator sail out into the Atlantic Ocean through the Pillars of Hercules and sail perhaps as far south as Cameroon or Gabon in West Africa. His voyage is recounted in a Greek translation entitled The Periplus or Travel Account of Hanno, supposedly an accurate copy of an inscription that actually hung in the temple of Baal Hamon in Carthage. It was decreed by the Carthaginians that Hanno should undertake a voyage beyond the Pillars of Hercules and found Phoenician cities. We sailed accordingly with 60 ships of 50 oars each and the body of men and women to the number of 30,000 and provisions and other necessaries. Preceding a day's sail we came to the extremity of the lake that was overhung by large mountains inhabited by savage clothed in the skins of wild beasts who drove us away by throwing stones and hindered us from landing. Sailing thence, we came to another river that was large and broad and full of crocodiles and hippopotamuses. Hanno writes down vivid descriptions of seeing active volcanoes spewing lava into the ocean, possibly the active volcano Mount Cameroon. And then quickly sailing forth, we passed by a burning country full of fragrance from which great torrents of fire flowed down to the sea and we sailed along with all speed being stricken by fear. After a journey of four days, we saw the land at night covered with flames and in the midst there was one lofty fire, greater than the rest, which seemed to touch the stars. Hanno even seems to have been the first to write down an encounter with what may have been Earth's largest living primates, with unfortunate results. We arrived at a bay called the Southern Horn, at the bottom of which lay an island full of savage people, the greater part of whom were women, whose bodies were hairy and whom our interpreters called gorillae. Though we pursued the men, we could not seize any of them, but all fled from us, escaping over the precipices and defending themselves with stones. Three women were however taken, but they attacked their conductors with their teeth and hands and could not be prevailed upon to accompany us. Having killed them, we flayed them and brought their skins with us to Carthage. We did not sail farther on, our provisions failing us. These hairy creatures may have been chimpanzees, monkeys, or what we today would call gorillas, all of which can be encountered in the region of Cameroon. On Hanno's return, the hairy skins he brought home were kept in the temple to the god Tanit in Carthage and according to Pliny the Elder, would remain in the city for as long as it existed. In the 19th century, when the American physician and missionary Thomas Stoughton Savage and the naturalist Jeffreys Wyman wrote the first scientific description of a gorilla, they gave them the name Troglodytes Gorilla after the mysterious description in Hanno's writing, and the name has stuck ever since. Another explorer named Himilco sailed out into the Atlantic and went in the opposite direction, sailing north up the coast of Spain and France, and even on to the British Isles. Here, he saw Celtic tribespeople sailing in coracles made of deer skin, a sight he found remarkable. They cleave the tempestuous sea and the current of the ocean, abounding in monsters with woven boats. Indeed, these people do not know how to fashion keels with pine and maple, but in a miraculous thing, they always fit out vessels from hides stretched together and often travel through the immense sea in a skin. Himilco also brought back stories of the vast expanse of the Atlantic to the west, a frightening sight to the sailors brought up in the enclosed inland sea of the Mediterranean. Beyond, towards the area to the west, there is a sea without end. The ocean lies open across a wide area and the sea stretches out. No man has entered upon these seas because the sea lacks winds that would drive the ships along. and no breeze from the sky favors a ship. It also seems that he may have seen whales swimming out there in the ocean, which were then nearly four times more numerous than they are today. Here and there, see monsters swim amid the slow ships sluggishly crawling along. Himilco reported that he had once seen these creatures in the ocean and proved their existence. These we have related to you, revealed a long time ago deep in the annals of the Carthaginians.