The Romans were at war with the people of Tarentum, who being able neither to carry on the war nor put an end to it, wished to make Pyrrhus their leader and summon him to the war, believing him to be a most formidable general. Pyrrhus couldn't resist this opportunity to position himself as the valiant defender of Greek civilization against these Latin barbarians. He gathered an armada and a large army complete with 20 war elephants, and in the year 280 BC, he sailed to southern Italy in full force. Himself a sophisticated Greek, Pyrrhus expected to meet an unruly barbarian horde on the battlefield. But Roman troops were by now toughened from their long wars of expansion in Italy, and they were already exhibiting the kind of organization that would one day make them famous. When he learned that the Romans were near and laying camped on the further side of the River Cyrus, he rode up to the river to get a view of them. When he observed their discipline, the appointment of their watches, their order, and the general arrangement of their camp, he was amazed and said to the friend that was nearest him, the discipline of these barbarians is not barbarous. But these early Roman legions were still no match for Greek phalanxes, and the sight of Pyrrhus' elephants terrified the Roman horses. Pyrrhus defeated the Romans in two battles, at Heraclea and at Ausculum in the year 279 BC, and he believed that Rome must soon concede the war and agree to the terms of his demands. But slightly to the bemusement of Pyrrhus, Rome simply refused to admit defeat. This refusal to ever sue for peace would become something of a Roman hallmark. Some have argued that Rome's very nature as a citizen democracy actually contributed to their immense doggedness in warfare. Their leaders were politicians and existed in a state of constant competition with each other for the support of the voting public. Any politician who signed a damaging peace treaty could be eviscerated in the senate as a coward, a fool, or even a traitor. This meant that Roman senators would often overwhelmingly vote to continue a war rather than admit defeat. This will to continue, along with their large reserves of citizen manpower, meant that Rome could often absorb terrific defeats, losing whole armies, and simply keep going. This often had the effect of simply grinding down their enemy's will to fight. According to Plutarch, who was fond of inventing dialogue for his historical characters, Pyrrhus made the following quip after his third victory with Rome. We are told that Pyrrhus said to one who was congratulating him on his victory, if we are victorious in one more battle with the Romans, we shall be utterly ruined, for he had lost great part of the forces with which he came, and all his friends and generals except a few. He had no others whom he could summon from home, and he saw that his allies in Italy were becoming indifferent, while the army of the Romans, as if from a fountain gushing forth indoors, was easily and speedily filled up again. After this series of Pyrrhic victories, Pyrrhus soon realized the conquest of Italy would elude him. He came within miles of Rome, but the tall Servian walls of the city meant that his beleaguered force had no hope of capturing it. Still, he couldn't bear the thought of returning home empty-handed. Pyrrhus decided that he would head to Sicily and see if he could have any more success helping the Greek colonies there fight against the Carthaginians. He arrived in the Greek town of Syracuse to a hero's welcome. Every Greek colony on the island sent troops to fill his army, and Pyrrhus would find the Carthaginian forces on Sicily to be a much softer target than the legions of Rome. The Carthaginian response to Pyrrhus couldn't have been more different to the Romans. With little desire to be dragged back into another war in Sicily, they offered to pay him off generously to leave them alone, but Pyrrhus refused. As Plutarch describes, when the Carthaginians were inclined to come to terms and were willing to pay him money and send him ships, he replied to them, his heart being set on greater things, that there could be no settlement or friendship between. himself and them unless they abandoned all Sicily. But Sicily, too, eventually defeated him. After years of war, his men were tired. The Carthaginians and Romans were now working together, so he faced the powerful armies of Rome on land and the vast navy of Carthage by sea. After finally meeting with defeat in southern Italy, he cut his losses and sailed for home with little to show for his years of war. As he sailed away, Plutarch imagines Pyrrhus reflecting on the situation he has left behind. He could not master Sicily, which was like a storm-tossed ship, but desired to leave her. It is said that at the time of his departure, Pyrrhus looked back at the island and said to those about him, my friend, what a wrestling ground for Carthaginians and Romans we are leaving behind us. Pyrrhus' campaign had ended in failure. With him gone, Rome quickly swept over the remaining Greek city-states of Italy and solidified its hold on the south of their peninsula. The Romans built roads connecting these wealthy Greek cities to the Roman network, and used the treasure they seized to build a grand series of new temples in the capital, as well as an enormous second aqueduct for Rome, the Aqua Anniovatus. Meanwhile, Carthage reclaimed many of the cities that Pyrrhus had taken in Sicily. But without a common enemy, the twin powers of Carthage and Rome were now butting up against each other. By the year 270 BC, Rome had captured the city of Regium right across the Straits of Messina. They could now look over the water and gaze directly at the coast of Sicily. The wrestling ground that Pyrrhus had left behind in Sicily would set the stage for the next dramatic period of Mediterranean history. It was a stage that would see a conflict unfold, that would dwarf the Sicilian wars for intensity and scale, that would last for a hundred years, that would bring both powers to the brink of bankruptcy, and cost more than a million lives. This was the beginning of the Punic Wars. Punic Wars The word Punic comes from Latin and is a mutation of the Greek word phoenice, or Phoenician. At this time, the Romans had come to use it to describe the Phoenician superpower of Carthage that sat facing them only three days voyage away on the other side of the sea. The historian Cassius Dio summarizes the situation as both the powers of Rome and Carthage slid towards war. The Carthaginians who had long been powerful, and the Romans who were now growing more rapidly stronger, kept viewing each other with jealousy. They were led into war partly by the desire of continually acquiring more, and partly also by fear. It was a chance incident that broke their truce and plunged them into war. The main source for almost every aspect of the First Punic War is the historian Polybius, a Greek who was sent to Rome in 167 BC as a hostage. Polybius was writing about the events of the First Punic War a century after they took place, but he was meticulous in his research and traveled widely, gathering as much first-hand knowledge and archival material as he could. As a Greek, he was something of an outsider in Rome, meaning that his portrayal of the war is considered to be relatively even-handed. The story that Polybius tells begins in the volcanic island of Sicily, where, around the beginning of the third century BC, trouble was once again threatening to erupt. At this time, Sicily had something of the Wild West about it. Large parts of it were lawless and fell between the influences of Carthage and the Roman Empire. Greeks. Both sides often used mercenaries to fight for them, but when a particular war was finished, it wasn't always so easy to get rid of these bands of rough and violent men. One such band were a group of mostly southern Italians who called themselves the Mamertines, or the Sons of Mars, the Roman god of war. In the past, they had been hired by Agathocles to fight Carthage in Sicily, but when the tyrant of Syracuse had died, they found themselves out of work. The Mamertines wandered the island for some time, likely engaging in theft and petty banditry to survive, until they reached the walled Greek town of Messina. Messina was a small settlement on the northeastern tip of Sicily, with the shadow of Mount Etna looming over the horizon, and its location was of great strategic importance. That's because Messina was one side of the narrowest crossing point between Sicily and Italy. Standing on the shore there, you can see the Italian mainland just over the water, and a ship could make the crossing in under 30 minutes. Anyone who controlled Messina would also control this crossing, and this meant that both Carthage and Rome were anxious about the city's future. When the band of Mamertines arrived in Messina, they must have made quite a sorry sight, and the people of the city originally took pity on them. They took them in and even gave them shelter in their own homes. But soon, these hired swords became restless and jealous of the people's comfortable lives. In fact, they began to plot to seize the city for themselves. Polybius recounts what happened next. Certain Campanians serving under Agathocles had long cast covetous eyes on the beauty and prosperity of Messina, and they availed themselves of the first opportunity to capture it by treachery. After being admitted as friends and occupying the city, they first expelled or massacred the citizens, and then took possession of the wives and families of the dispossessed victims. They next divided among themselves the land and all other property. For the next 20 years or so, the Mamertines would run Messina as a kind of pirate fortress. They would use it as a base to conduct raids on nearby towns and villages, and to rob ships that sailed through the narrow straits. But soon, the last remaining Greek king in Sicily, a king of Syracuse named Iero, had had enough. In the year 265 BC, he moved to attack the city of Messina to stamp out these troublesome pirates. Fearing execution for their crimes, the Mamertines played the only card left to them, trading on the strategic importance of the city. They sent out requests for help to both of the big players in the region, to Rome and to Carthage. The Carthaginians, being closer, came to their help first, delighted as always to kick sand in the face of the Greeks. They moved a small army into Messina and helped the Mamertines to defend it. This was just the latest move in the nearly two-century chess game between Carthage and the Greeks of Sicily, but to the Romans, it was a worrying move. With control of the crossing over to Italy, the Romans began to fear that Carthage was plotting an invasion of the mainland, as Polybius recalls. The Romans saw all this and felt that it was absolutely necessary not to let Messina slip or allow the Carthaginians to secure what would be like a bridge to enable them to cross into Italy. The Roman senate was bitterly divided on what to do, with many expressing disgust at coming to the aid of what amounted to a band of pirates. But eventually, their fears won out. They voted to send a force to Messina to secure the crossing, led by a consul named Appius Claudius. Rome was an inland city situated on the river Tiber, and so the Romans were not a naturally sea-going people. With few ships of their own, they borrowed as many as
they could from the coastal cities of southern Italy. When they first took in hand to send troops across to Messina, they not only had no decked vessels but no warships at all, not so much as a single galley, but they borrowed quinqueremes and triemes from Tarentum and Locri and even from Alea and Neapolis. The Romans under the command of Appius successfully made the short crossing in 264 BC, catching the powerful Carthaginian navy off guard. When they arrived in Messina, the Italian mammatines ousted the Carthaginians who had come to their aid and welcomed the Roman army into the town in their place. The Roman capture of Messina immediately shifted the balance of power in Sicily. The Greeks of Syracuse formed a hasty alliance with their ancient enemies in Carthage, overturning two centuries of war to repel this new invader, but it was no good. The Roman commander Appius descended on Syracuse with lightning speed, as Polybius writes. Having succeeded in engaging the enemy, thenceforth he scoured the territory of Syracuse and her allies with impunity, and laid it waste without finding anyone to dispute the possession of the open country with him. Finally, he sat down before Syracuse itself and laid siege to it. King Hiero saw no other way out. He surrendered, switched sides, and swore allegiance to the Romans. This was the end of the last independent Greek states in Italy and Sicily, and the future of the Mediterranean would now be decided by either Carthage or Rome. Both sides now marched to war. In this first Punic War, the Carthaginians were clearly concerned. They drew up a large army of Celts, Iberians, and other peoples, and dispatched it to Sicily. But they were also confident in their overall strategy, which had served them well in previous Sicilian wars. While the warships of Carthage commanded the waves, their trading empire would continue to fill their treasury with gold, and that meant there would always be soldiers ready to fight for them. At first, it seemed the Romans had no hope of changing this situation. They had virtually no navy, and their own shipbuilding technology lagged behind, perhaps by centuries. As the historian Polybius writes, yet so long as the Carthaginians were in undisturbed command of the sea, the balance of success could not incline decisively in their favor. So, they took upon themselves there and then to meet the Carthaginians at sea, on which they had for generations held undisputed supremacy. The Carthaginian navy benefited from a thousand years of Phoenician shipbuilding and sailing tradition, but their centuries of relatively unchallenged dominance of the sea had also made them somewhat complacent. Their method of fighting on the water was based mostly on the use of heavy bronze rams fixed to the front of their ships. The Phoenician sailors relied on outmaneuvering their enemies on the waves with their superior sailing, drawing close with their oars, and crashing into the sides of enemy ships with these rams, striking them in the hulls below the waterline. It was a method of warfare that had remained unchanged for the last 500 years, and the Carthaginians were among the best in the world at this tricky way of fighting. But soon, the Romans would come across a stroke of good luck. After one skirmish on the sea, a Carthaginian galley had run aground on the shores of Italy. It was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to learn what made the Carthaginian navy so effective. The Romans rushed to secure the vessel, to haul it away and study its secrets, as Polybius records. The Carthaginians, having put to sea in the strait to attack, a decked vessel of theirs charged so furiously that it ran aground, and falling into the hands of the Romans, served them as a model on which they constructed the
their whole fleet, and if this had not happened, it is clear that they would have been completely hindered from carrying out their design. What the Romans found on this vessel would have intrigued and excited them. At that time, the Carthaginians were legendary, not just for their sailing and the size of their fleet, but also how quickly they could build ships. The writer Pliny the Elder recounts what was possible in those days. Pisa relates that 220 ships were wholly constructed in 45 days. In the Second Punic War too, the fleet was at sea the fortieth day after the axe had been put to the tree. This was long considered to be an exaggeration by ancient writers, but the discovery of the Phoenician shipwreck, known as the Marsala Ship, has thrown light on how this kind of mass manufacture could actually have been possible. When the wreck was discovered, archaeologists found that the ship had each section of its hull marked with certain Phoenician letters. It's thought that these sections would have been built separately, mass-produced in separate factories and then brought together in their final location, with a level of coordination that would not be seen again before the Industrial Revolution. These ships were a kind of ancient flat-pack furniture. Armed with this new knowledge, the Romans began the process of copying the Carthaginian ship exactly, but they didn't do very well. In their first engagement with Carthage, the inferior mobility of these Roman ships and the inexperience of their sailors meant that a squadron of seventeen Roman vessels was destroyed, easily outmaneuvered by the Phoenicians, and dealt death blows by their rams. Following this, the Romans began to change their tactics. Getting the hang of the complicated business of outmaneuvering and ramming enemy ships would take too long, and so they tried to bring the battles at sea into more familiar territory. To do this, they developed an ingenious new technology. It was a kind of boarding bridge that they called a corvus, the Latin word for crow. These were raised like a drawbridge at the front of the ship, and when they drew near to an enemy vessel, these gangplanks would have dropped down onto the enemy deck, where a metal spike on the underside would drive its way into the wood. These bridges would now hold the two ships together, neutralizing the speed and agility of the Carthaginian vessels, preventing them from ramming, and allowing the Roman legionaries to flood on board. It was a crude but surprisingly effective tactic. The Romans kept their new inventions hidden, and now with a secret naval weapon of their own, they risked a large-scale confrontation on the sea. The Carthaginian fleet was busy plundering at a place called Mylae on the coast of northern Sicily when they saw the Roman sails on the horizon. They were delighted that their enemies had finally risked a battle, and were supremely confident of sending the whole fleet of this troublesome Italian power straight to the bottom of the ocean. Polybius recounts what happened next. No sooner did the Carthaginians sight him than with joy they put to sea, with a hundred and thirty sail, feeling supreme contempt for the Roman ignorance of seamanship. Accordingly, they all sailed with their prows directed straight at their enemy. They did not think the engagement worth even the trouble of ranging their ships in any order. When they neared the enemy, they saw the crows raised aloft on the prows of several ships. The Carthaginians were for a time in a state of perplexity, for they were quite strangers to such contrivances as these engines. Feeling however a complete contempt for their opponent, they charged without flinching. But as soon as they came to close quarters, their ships were invariably tightly grappled by these machines. The enemy boarded by means of the crows and engaged them on their decks, and in the end some of the Carthaginians were cut down, while others surrendered in bewildered terror at the battle in which they found themselves engaged, which eventually became exactly like a land fight. Eventually the Carthaginians turned and fled. fled, bewildered at the novelty of the occurrence, and with a loss of 50 ships. For Carthage, this was an utter disaster. Flying high from their successes, the Romans soon organized invasions of the islands of Sardinia and Corsica, Carthaginian possessions for centuries that had never been seriously threatened. They even organized an invasion of North Africa itself, hoping to follow in the footsteps of Agathocles and march on the capital of Carthage. For the Carthaginians, things were starting to get out of hand. As the Roman invasion force descended upon the coast, Carthage sent out the entirety of its fleet to meet them on the open sea. Polybius recounts that as they sighted the Roman sails on the horizon, the commanders of Carthage spoke to their sailors and soldiers, and vocalized a fear that must have been on the lips of every man and woman in the Phoenician territories, that this war was now in danger of coming home. Meanwhile, the Carthaginian commanders had briefly addressed their men. They pointed out to them that victory in this battle would ensure that the war in the future was confined to the question of the possession of Sicily, while if they were beaten, they would have hereafter to fight for their native land, and for all that they held dear. Polybius records that more than 600 ships came together in the battle that ensued. By the time he was writing his history of the Punic Wars, more than a hundred years later, the size of warships had dramatically increased, and so he likely wildly overestimates the number of men involved, putting it at well over 300,000. Nevertheless, the battle was enormous, and probably involved at least 120,000 sailors, soldiers, rowers, and marines.