The vast battlefield would have devolved into a chaos of clashing oars and rams, shouting men and the thud of the corvus bridges crushing down onto the decks, the clashing of shields and swords, the crashing of waves, and the shrieking of gulls overhead. By the end of the day, the result of the battle was a decisive defeat for the Carthaginians. With the fleet of Carthage scattered, the Romans successfully made the crossing into Africa, and landed on the peninsula of Cape Bonn on the other side of the bay from the city. The citizens of Carthage would now have been able to see the campfires of the Roman army in the distance at night. Some of the city's oldest residents would still have remembered when the army of Agathocles had menaced the city only half a century before, when they had watched those ships burning on the shoreline. The Carthaginians had had enough. They asked the Romans for a peace treaty to sign, but the Roman demands were so punishing that the Carthaginians, even in their desperate state, could not accept it, and so the war dragged on. But the Romans, like Agathocles, found themselves unable to take the city of Carthage. The Roman expeditionary force sent to capture the city was beaten disastrously by a smaller Carthaginian army at the Battle of Tunis, and the Roman consul leading it was captured and killed. In this way, the fortunes of each side ticked back and forth like a pendulum. Another naval battle at Cape Hermaeum saw another Roman victory, and another hundred Carthaginian ships sunk. But the Romans had no time to celebrate. On its return voyage home, the victorious Roman fleet was hit by a devastating storm, as Polybius records. The disaster was indeed extreme, for out of their 364 vessels, 80 only remained. The rest were either swamped or driven by the surf upon the rocks and headlands, where they went to pieces and filled all the seaboard with corpses and wreckage. No greater catastrophe is to be found in all history as befalling a fleet at one time. 284 ships were lost, with an estimated 60,000 sailors sinking to the bottom of the sea. It was among the worst naval disasters in history. Some historians have speculated that the Romans' secret weapon, the Corvus boarding bridges, may have actually...
made their ships top-heavy and prone to After this disaster, there are no mentions of the corvus ever being used again on Roman ships. The war would drag on for another 14 years, with most of the fighting taking place in Sicily and the surrounding seas. But by the year 241 BC, Carthage was spent. The Carthaginian senate ordered their general in Sicily to sign whatever peace treaty the Romans demanded, no matter how punishing. This general was a man named Hamilcar Barca. He was proud, a competent general, and he had been winning some of his battles in Sicily. He believed that signing such a punishing treaty was madness, and so he refused the order to negotiate. In his place, the senate sent a more junior commander to capitulate to Rome. The First Punic War ended in the year 241 BC, 23 years after it had begun, with the signing of the Treaty of Lutarchus. It was one of the longest continuous wars to ever take place in the ancient world. It had exhausted both Rome and Carthage, and driven them both to the brink of bankruptcy. But Rome, as the victor, had at least gained something from all the years of carnage. Under the terms of the treaty, Carthage was forced to give up all its remaining territory in Sicily to Rome, and possibly the island of Corsica too. Carthage was forced to release all Roman prisoners without ransom, while hefty ransoms were charged for any Carthaginian held by Rome. They were forced to pay a staggering 82 tons of silver in reparations to Rome over the next 10 years. All of this meant that Carthage could no longer afford to pay its armies. Many of these were foreign mercenaries that it was already in debt to, and in the same year as the treaty was signed, a large band of these mercenaries, around 20,000 men or so, camped outside the city itself, and refused to budge until they got paid. But the state was all but bankrupt. When the Carthaginian senate delayed in paying them, they mutinied and began looting and burning the countryside. While the two decades of war had been tough on the citizens of Carthage, it had been even tougher on the rural regions of Africa it ruled over. Carthaginian provinces like Libya had sent huge numbers of men to fight for Carthage, and they were subjected to punishing taxes to pay for it all. Their resentment had been slowly building, and now it boiled over. When news of this army of rioting mercenaries reached some of these discontented cities, they saw their chance to free themselves of the rule of Carthage entirely. Many of them rebelled, and soon Carthage was engulfed in a civil war. It looked for the first time like the entire empire might come apart at the seams, as Polybius writes. For three years and about four months did the mercenaries maintain a war against the Carthaginians, which far surpassed any that I have heard of for cruelty and inhumanity. The many battles in which they had been engaged at sea had naturally left them ill-supplied with arms, sailors, and vessels. They had no store of provisions ready, and no expectation whatever of external assistance from friends or allies. They were indeed now thoroughly taught the difference between a foreign war carried on beyond the seas and a domestic insurrection. The civil war that followed, which would become known as the Mercenary War, would unfold with unparalleled brutality. The bodies of crucified rebels would have become a regular sight along the roads. The instability caused a famine, and Carthage was forced to raise an army from its citizens, forcing ordinary people in the capital to fight. The man tasked by the Carthaginian senate with carrying out this civil war was the proud general Hamilcar Barca, the man who had refused to
sign the treaty with Rome. Throughout these years of violence, he would have seen his homeland burning, his people starving and dying, and all this time, he nursed his hatred for his Roman enemies. At enormous cost, Hamilcar Barca would eventually crush the rebels, and he sometimes did this quite literally. Many insurgents captured in the later years of the war were executed beneath the feet of Carthage's elephants, the ultimate living symbol of the empire's power. After four years of civil war, some measure of order returned to the scorched countryside. The empire of Carthage had survived, but they were now in an even worse state than before. Meanwhile, the Romans had spent four years recovering and drawing wealth from their new lands in Sicily and Corsica. At Carthage's time of weakness, Rome moved to capture the island of Sardinia too, which had escaped its grasp during the war and was now rebelling against Carthage's weakened rule. The Carthaginians could do nothing to stop them, as Polybius recalls. When the Carthaginians expressed indignation at this, on the ground that the lordship over Sardinia more properly belonged to them, the Romans voted to declare war against them. The Carthaginians, however, having just had an almost miraculous escape from annihilation in the recent civil war, yielded to the necessities of the hour and not only abandoned Sardinia, but they paid the Romans 1,200 talents into the bargain that they might not be obliged to undertake the war for the present. The new balance of power in the Mediterranean was clear. Carthage was now a hollowed-out husk. If they were to reclaim any of the power that they had once held, the next generation of Carthaginian military leaders would need to produce a general of such genius that he could turn around the hopes and fortunes of this floundering empire, a general that would conduct a campaign so daring that it is still studied in military academies to this day. That man would bear a name that in Phoenician meant by the grace of Baal. His name was Hannibal. Hannibal was the son of the general Hamilcar Barca. When the first Punic War ended, he was a boy of only six years old, and he would have watched with the formative mind of a child as the world he knew was torn apart by violence, and his father struggled to end the rebellions. When Rome had snatched away the island of Sardinia, Carthage lost the last of its profitable central Mediterranean islands, and with the empire so weakened, its economy was in freefall. If it was to right itself, Carthage would need to find vast resources of minerals, metals, and people. Hannibal's father knew that the only way these could be found was by expanding Carthage's last remaining overseas territories. These were in southern Spain, as Polybius writes. Hamilcar, with the anger felt by all his compatriots at this last outrage, as soon as he had finally crushed the mutiny of mercenaries and secured the safety of his country, at once threw all his efforts into the conquest of Spain. Hamilcar gathered an army and set out for the Spanish colonies. Rome now ruled the seas, and Carthage's navy was so weakened that he was unable to travel the whole way to Spain by ship. Instead, he had to march all the way across North Africa and ferry his army across the sea at the narrow straits of Gibraltar. When he left, he took his own young son Hannibal with him to teach the boy the art of war and to ensure that he passed on his burning hatred. hatred for Rome. At the time when his father was about to start with his army on his expedition to Spain, Hannibal, then nine years of age, was standing by the altar while Hamilcar was sacrificing to Zeus. His father took him by the hand, led him up to the altar, and bade him lay his hand on the victim and swear never to be the friend of the Romans. He made his own son Hannibal such an enemy of Rome that none could be more bitter. Despite the weakened state of Carthage, Hamilcar succeeded in conquering the Celtic tribes of Spain. He built a new city there that became known as New Carthage, now the southern Spanish city of Cartagena. While the young boy Hannibal grew up in Spain, he would have likely visited the temple of Melkart, or Hercules in Gardiz, that temple with the golden olive tree at its center. He would have heard stories about Hercules and his legendary journey over the Alps, herding the cattle of Geryon the Giant. Perhaps he would have even learned the history of the Greek Agathocles and his daring strike right at the heart of his stronger enemy. All this while, he would have dreamed of one day making his own mark on history. When his father Hamilcar died and his successor was assassinated, it would soon fall to the young Hannibal to lead the Carthaginian armies in Spain. He continued his father's work of expanding their territories, pushing back the local Celtic tribes who opposed him, and it's clear he developed a flair for warfare. By the time he was 27, Hannibal controlled more than half of the Iberian Peninsula, a vast and wealthy territory of nearly a quarter million square kilometers. From his father, he had inherited an army of 60,000 battle-hardened troops, the best in the empire, and a stable of 200 war elephants. He had also forged alliances with a number of Celtic tribes in Spain that he knew would come to his aid if needed. He was now at the head of the wealthiest and most powerful province of the empire. Hannibal and his father's success in Spain restored the lifeblood of Carthage, and silver once again flowed through the empire. It's said that just one Spanish mine in the region of Bebelo, with its shafts running more than two kilometers into the mountainside, was producing nearly a thousand kilograms of silver each week for Hannibal's treasury. Analysis shows that the coins being minted in Spain at this time were of an exceptionally high content of silver, while those being minted back in Carthage were still watered down with cheaper metals. All of this meant that Hannibal was beginning to feel increasingly confident about testing the bounds of what he could get away with, both with the senate back in Carthage and with his sworn enemy of Rome. The Roman poet Sileus Italicus gives one description of his character. He was one, by nature, eager for action, yet an oath-breaker, cunning beyond all, though of questionable fairness. Armed, he was no respecter of the gods, bold to do wrong, scorning the virtues of peace, and with a thirst for human blood alive in his deepest marrow. Above all, in the flower of his youth, he longed to erase that defeat, a generation's shame, and drown their peace treaty deep in the Sicilian Sea. The location for the flashpoint that would spark the Second Punic War was the town of Saguntum, just north of what is today Valencia in southern Spain. Saguntum was a Roman ally, and Rome had been watching with concern as Carthage's Spanish borders edged ever closer. Rome had made it very clear that they would not tolerate a Carthaginian attack on the city of Saguntum, but Hannibal was willing to call their bluff. In the year 219 BC, at the age of 28, he led his army against the city and put it under siege. The fighting didn't go smoothly. The people of Saguntum put up a fierce defense from their walls, and Hannibal was even wounded in the thigh by a javelin. But his move to take the city was a clear spit in the eye of the Romans. When they heard about what was happening, Rome dispatched some envoys who turned up at Hannibal's siege camp at Saguntum and demanded to speak with him. He had his men send them away, telling them that he was too busy to talk to them. The Romans must have left seething with rage. Back in Carthage, news of Hannibal's actions were likely met with excitement by his supporters and with a frenzy of dismay by others. One of his great opponents, a man named Hanno, is supposed to have delivered a blistering speech against him in the Carthaginian senate, the words of which the later Roman historian Livy imagines. As long as any single representative of the blood and name of Barca survives, our treaty with Rome will never remain unimperiled. You have sent to the army, as though supplying fuel to fire, a young man who is consumed with a passion for sovereign power, and who recognizes that the only way to it lies in passing his life surrounded by armed legions and perpetually stirring up fresh wars. It is against Carthage that Hannibal is now bringing up his towers. It is Carthage whose walls he is shaking with his battering rams. The ruins of Saguntum will fall on our heads, and the war which has begun with Saguntum will have to be carried on with Rome. But Hannibal also had plenty of supporters, and even his strongest opponents in the senate found themselves in something of a bind. Many would have likely preferred to have Hannibal arrested and his armies given to some more predictable general, but in truth, they had no idea how to do this. Hannibal's soldiers were loyal to him, and any move against him would cause a civil war that could lose Carthage, all of the wealthy Spanish provinces on which their entire economy now rested. But the Romans, too, were paralyzed by indecision. For the eight months of the siege of Saguntum, Rome did nothing but complain. When Hannibal finally took the city, the Romans sent a delegation of ambassadors to Africa to demand an explanation. The clouds of war were once again gathering over the sea. When these men arrived, they spoke before the Carthaginian senate and demanded to know whether Hannibal's capture of Saguntum was the official policy of Carthage or just the work of one rogue general. If he had acted alone, they demanded that Hannibal be arrested and handed over for punishment. If Carthage failed to do that, Rome would declare war. The historian Appian described this moment as the Carthaginian senate made its choice. The Romans now sent ambassadors to Carthage to demand that Hannibal should be delivered up to them as a violator of the treaty. If they would not give him up, war was to be declared forthwith. The chief of the embassy pointed to the fold of his toga and smiling said, Here, Carthaginians, I bring you peace or war. You may take whichever you choose. The latter replied, You may give us whichever you like. When the Romans offered war, they all cried out. We accept it. The poet Sileus Italicus, writing some centuries after the conflict, gives an even more florid rendition. He gestured to them that he carried war and peace in his hands, demanding they choose, and when the senators refused to accept either, he replied, shaking his robes as if pouring out battle and ruin from his arms, take war, unhappy Libya, with an outcome like the first. The Roman historian Livy describes the conflict that ensued in the following terms. The most memorable of all wars ever waged, the war that is which, under the leadership of Hannibal, the Carthaginians waged with the Roman people, for neither have states or nations met in arms possessed of ampler resources, nor was their own might and power ever so great. Growing up among the fires of civil war, Hannibal had learned never to let your heart
homeland become a battlefield. He knew that if he waited in Spain, his lands would soon become host to a Roman invasion force. His fields would burn, his silver mines would dry up, and his people would suffer. So, he decided to take his war to Rome. He withdrew to his capital of New Carthage for the winter to prepare and plan. Here, Livy describes him giving the following speech to his soldiers. You are on the eve of an expedition that will carry you far afield, and it is uncertain when you will see again your homes. With the first signs of spring, with heaven's good help, we may begin a war that shall bring us vast renown and treasure. The journey from New Carthage to Italy was one of about 1500 kilometers, so Hannibal knew that a long and dangerous march awaited him once the spring arrived, and at the end of this journey, a monumental problem loomed ahead of him. That's because the geography of the Italian peninsula made it something of a natural fortress. Beginning in the Cretaceous period around a hundred million years ago, the steady northward movement of the African continental plate, crushing beneath the Eurasian plate in the region of Sicily, had caused the earth's crust to bend and pleat, driving up a dramatic series of mountains that form a sheer wall between the Italian peninsula and Celtic Western Europe, which the Romans called Gaul. These mountains, known as the Alps, can tower up to five kilometers from sea level with permanent snow-capped peaks choked with icy glaciers and with only a few narrow crossing points. The Roman writer Ammianus Marcellinus describes the appearance of the Alps at this time. This country of Gaul, because of its lofty chains of mountains always covered with formidable snows, was formerly all but unknown to the inhabitants of the rest of the globe except where it borders on the coast, and mountain bulwarks enclose it on every side, surrounding it naturally as if by the art of man. The most commonly used roads were the ones that went around this natural wall, the narrow corridor that follows the coastline, past what is now the French port town of Nice. But as the only way into and out of Italy, these roads were heavily defended and lined with ports stacked with Roman legionaries. Here, the Romans could have staged a fearsome defense. Faced with this problem, Hannibal would need a daring solution, and it's here that those stories may have come back to him, stories he must have heard as a child of the great hero Hercules leading his herd of cattle directly over the Alps. The Romans believed that it was impossible to cross the Alps with an army, weighed down with supplies, with horses, oxen, and with a herd of 37 elephants. It would be madness to even attempt it, and for that reason, it was the last thing they would ever have expected. When spring came and the Romans heard of the Carthaginian army beginning its march, they sent ambassadors along the coastal roads and into what they called Transalpine Gaul. There were Celtic tribes of Gauls living on both the Italian and the northern side of the Alps, and so the Romans used the Latin word cis, meaning on this side, and trans, meaning on the other side, to differentiate between them. The Roman ambassadors approached the leaders of these Transalpine Gauls and informed them of the Carthaginian army then making its way towards them. They asked these Gauls to bar the way to Hannibal and his troops, but they didn't get the reception they'd hoped for, as Livy describes.