In 2019, a team of 20 modern sailors successfully piloted a replica of a single-masted Carthaginian merchant vessel across the Atlantic Ocean, departing from the site of Carthage and landing in the Caribbean five months later, demonstrating that Phoenician ships had the ability to reach the Americas 2,000 years before Columbus. As the city of Carthage grew, its population boomed. While some ancient writers record it as having a population of more than 700,000 people, this is thought to be unlikely. But estimates based on the size of the city and the size of civilian armies drawn up in times of crisis, have suggested that the population may have reached 400,000. By the year 400 BC, the city walls had been rebuilt to now stand a towering 15 meters high, with a triple line of ditches and defenses on the landward side. The hill of Birsa, where legend has it that Elishaia played her trick with the oxhide, was now itself ringed with an inner defensive wall and loomed over the rest of the city as a fortified citadel. The Roman writer Appian writes the following description of the city. On the seaside, the city was protected by a single wall. Toward the south in the mainland, where the citadel of Birsa stood on the Ithmus, there was a triple wall. The height of each wall was 15 meter without counting parapets and towers, which were separated from each other by a space of 60 meters. One of the most remarkable features of ancient Carthage was the innovative design of its harbour known as the Cothon. Likely built sometime in the third or second century BC, this comprised a large rectangular commercial harbour for civilian ships that led into a unique circular docking bay for the military ships of Carthage's war fleet. The harbour was so large that today the shape of its outline can still be seen in the coast of the city of Tunis. Appian describes the unique design of this harbour. The harbours had communication with each other and a common entrance from the sea 20 meters wide, which could be closed with iron chains. The first port was for merchant vessels and here were collected all kinds of ships' tackle. Within the second port was an island which, together with the port itself, was enclosed by high embankments. These embankments were full of shipyards which had capacity for 220 vessels. Above them were magazines for their tackle and furniture. Two ionic columns stood in front of each dock. On the island was built the admiral's house from which the trumpeter gave signals, the herald delivered orders, and the admiral himself overlooked everything. At this time, Carthage had the largest and most powerful fleet in the Mediterranean, and the military port was built to conceal the ships docked within and ensure that no spies could glean any of their secrets or keep tabs on their movements. The island lay near the entrance to the harbour and rose to a considerable height so that the admiral could observe what was going on at sea, while those who were approaching by water could not get any clear view of what took place within. Not even the incoming merchants could see the docks, for a double wall enclosed them and there were gates by which merchant ships could pass from the first port to the city without traversing the dockyards. Such was the appearance of Carthage at the time. Between the harbour and the citadel of Birsa on the hill stood the Ogon. the large open marketplace of the city where all manner of goods and foods could be bought. Archaeological studies of plant matter found in Carthage show that the ancient Carthaginians enjoyed a varied diet. Walking through the markets of the city, you would be able to buy wheat, barley, and other grains, numerous vegetables like artichokes and cabbages, pulses and lentils, and fruits including pomegranates, grapes, figs, olives, peaches, plums, and melons, as well as nuts like pistachios and almonds. Olives were pressed into oil and its people ate fish like grey mullet, sea perch, eels, and dolphins, as well as the meat of sheep, pigs, goats, chickens, and occasionally even dogs. The Carthaginians, like most people in the ancient world, were obsessed with a pungent, salty sauce known as garum which was brewed from the fermenting of fish entrails and which was probably similar to the fish sauce used today in East Asian cuisine. In the wreck of one Carthaginian ship found off the coast of Sicily in Marsala, archaeologists have also uncovered the remains of cannabis stalks which may have been chewed by the ship's rowers and could also have been enjoyed on land, either chewed or brewed into a tea. Wine was particularly beloved too, and especially a particular kind of sweet dessert wine made from sun-dried grapes. One agricultural handbook written by a Carthaginian named Margo has survived in fragments of Greek and Latin translation and it describes the process of making this wine. Pick some well-ripened early grapes. Discard any that are mildewed or damaged. Lay down reeds and spread the grapes out in the sun on top. Cover them at night so that the dew will not moisten them. When they are dried, pick the grapes off stems and put them in a jar or pitcher. Add some unfermented wine, the best you have, until the grapes are just covered. After six days when the grapes have absorbed it all and are swollen, put them in a basket, put them through the press, and collect the resulting liquid. Bottle the liquid in stopper jars and after 20 or 30 days when the fermentation is over, coat the lids with plaster and cover them with leather. As a typical Phoenician city, Carthage initially had a small footprint in North Africa and in its early days it was reliant on its overseas territories in Sardinia and Sicily for more than half of its food brought across the sea on grain ships. But in the 6th century, it began to expand its territory around the city. The Carthaginians either expelled local people or came to agreements with them and built a network of towns and forts to the south, east, and west, and began to farm the land themselves. A later writer, Diodorus of Sicily, would pen the following description of the abundant hinterland that would soon stretch beyond the city. All the lands were set with gardens and orchards watered by numerous springs and canals. There were well-constructed country houses built with lime along the route, announcing widespread wealth. The land was cultivated with vines, olive trees, and a whole host of fruit trees. On both sides, there were herds of oxen and sheep grazing on the plain, and near the main pastures and the marshes, there were studs of horses. In its outposts in Sardinia, Spain, and Sicily, Carthage began a similar process, turning what had once been small trading posts into more solid and fortified territories with their own agricultural land. Soon, the city of Carthage would be more or less self-sufficient, as the Roman writer Appian describes. Gradually acquiring strength, they mastered Africa and the greater part of the Mediterranean, carried war into Sicily and Sardinia, and the other islands of that sea, and also into Spain. They sent out numerous colonies. They became a match for the Greeks in power and next to the Persians in wealth. The typical Carthaginian house was built around a central courtyard, and the wealthier dwellings had an upstairs and a terrace. Finer houses had cupboards and shelves built into the walls, and often a clay bread oven. We can imagine that this was the home of the Carthaginians, and the Carthaginians were the first to build a house in the middle of the Carthaginian plain. the smells of this baking bread along with the pungent aromas from the tanneries and wineries, the smells of animals and incense, cooked fish, and salty garum sauce. Wealthy houses also contained elaborate bathrooms with separate changing facilities, and baths plastered with water-resistant stucco. Before bathing, oil would be applied to the body, and a bronze tool known as a strigil was used to scrape dirt from the skin. While in Greek houses, these bathrooms were usually built off the kitchen, the Carthaginians built their bathrooms next to the entrance to the house, suggesting that there was some sort of ritual purpose to the bathing, separating the dusty, unclean world of outside from the clean inner space of the home. A variety of animals would have been visible on the crowded city streets. These would have included beasts of burden like oxen and horses, stray dogs and cats, and noisy caravans of donkeys coming in from the desert. But they also seem to have drawn animals as curiosities from all parts of Africa. A species of huge lion known as the Barbary lion could be found all across this region and would later be captured for spectacles, including in the Roman arenas. A species of monkey known as the Barbary macaque is also native to this area. Diodorus of Sicily records one account of Carthaginians keeping these monkeys as apparently much beloved pets. In these cities, many of the customs were very different from those current among us. For the apes lived in the same houses as the men, being regarded among them as gods, just as the dogs are among the Egyptians. And from the provisions laid up in the storerooms, the beasts took their food without hindrance whenever they wished. For any who killed this animal as if he had committed the greatest sacrilege, death was established as the penalty. Around this time, monkeys began appearing as a motif in the art of regions of Italy, Sardinia, and elsewhere, suggesting that the Carthaginians were even exporting this animal to other regions. Some Barbary macaques were mummified in Egyptian tombs alongside pharaohs, and the skull of a Barbary macaque dated to around this time has even been unearthed as far away as Northern Ireland. Of course, in vast stables to the south of the city were kept the animals that in most people's minds are most inseparably associated with the city of Carthage, that is, the elephant. The North African elephant is an extinct subspecies of the African elephant that lived north of the Sahara desert. Carthaginian paintings on walls, coins, and mosaics show that these elephants had the swooping backs and large ears typical of the African elephant that roamed the savannah, but it was considerably smaller and was likely similar in size to another surviving subspecies, the African forest elephant. These reach a shoulder height of about two and a half meters, only a little taller than the largest shire horses. But of course, their thick and heavy frames mean they weigh more than 15 times the average horse. For this reason, these elephants were used by the Carthaginians as fearsome weapons of war. Some historians have speculated that Carthage may also have imported some much larger Indian elephants, which were at that time being used by the Seleucid dynasty in Syria. One elephant that was the pride of the later Carthaginian army was known by the name Souros, which some have translated to mean the Syrian. If true, this Syrian elephant would have towered as much as a meter over the smaller Carthaginian elephants and would have been a truly terrifying sight on the battlefield. In India and Southeast Asia, it has always been common to use elephants as work animals to transport heavy loads for construction, but it's not clear whether the Carthaginians used their elephants in this manner or whether these precious animals were only reserved for their power and prestige to be used as living tanks on the battlefield, as the writer Pliny the
Elder describes. Elephants when tamed are employed in war and carry into the ranks of the enemy towers filled with armed men, and on them in a very great measure depends the ultimate result of the battles that are fought in the East. They tread underfoot whole companies and crush the men in their armour. But I think it's not hard to imagine that, as in India, elephants may also have been used ceremonially in festivals and parades to carry kings and generals, a living embodiment of the might of this new empire. While Carthage didn't hesitate to go to war to defend its interests and protect its trade, it was not at heart a warrior culture, and it never suffered a conflict to continue any longer than it absolutely had to. The Carthaginians often relied on diplomatic solutions and agreements to avoid fighting with their various neighbours in the Mediterranean. One such agreement was settled in the year 509 BC with a minor city-state in central Italy, in the region of Latium, whose people spoke a small Italic dialect called Latin. This city's people had just that year thrown off the rule of their Etruscan king and abolished kingship in the city for good. In place of a king, they had brought in the rule of a pair of elected consuls drawn from the aristocracy, a system strikingly similar to and perhaps even inspired by the Carthaginians. This city's name was Rome. The Romans at that time were among several powers in central Italy, facing rivals in the Etruscans to the north and powerful tribal confederacies like the Samnites, all fighting for dominance in the plains of central Italy. The Carthaginians seem to have taken note of this regional development and proceeded to sign a treaty with this new Roman republic, the contents of which the Greek historian Polybius records. There shall be friendship between the Romans and their allies, and the Carthaginians and their allies, on these conditions. Neither the Romans nor their allies are to sail beyond the fair peninsula unless driven by stress of weather or the fear of enemies. If any one of them be driven ashore, he shall not buy or take anything for himself save what is needed for the repair of his ship and the service of the gods, and he shall depart within five days. Carthage shall build no fort in Laetium, and if they enter the district in arms, they shall not stay a night therein. The theme of this treaty was simple. You leave us alone, and we will leave you alone. While Rome was at this point very much on the Carthaginians' radar, it seems that they considered this Italian city-republic to be little cause of concern. Around the year 410 BC, Carthage began minting its own silver coins, and each coin would be stamped with the symbol of a palm tree, in Greek known as phoenike, now becoming a symbol of Phoenician identity. Carthage was now presenting itself as the new champion of the Phoenician people, the capital of the Phoenician world. It was now beginning to look a lot like an empire, and like all empires, it soon found an increasing need to defend and expand its territory. It's often said that Carthage relied on mercenaries to fight its wars, but this is something of an oversimplification. While these kinds of armies for hire did make up one part of their forces, in fact, there were all kinds of reasons that people came to fight for the Empire of Carthage. Many of their soldiers were sent to fight for them as part of treaties, just as the Phoenicians had once promised to send their ships to fight for Assyria. As Carthage expanded to conquer new peoples all along the North African coast and across the Mediterranean, ever more power and variety was added to its forces. When war came, each ally and province would send fighters of a particular kind based on what they specialized in. in. The North African power of Numidia experienced cavalry and javelin throwers, while colonies in the island of Majorca would send slingers, and peasant spearmen with large round shields were conscripted from the fields of Libya in the east. Celts from Spain made up some part of their forces, and sometimes even Greeks and Italians ended up fighting in these armies. There was only one group of people who hardly ever fought for Carthage, and that was the citizens of Carthage themselves. The Carthaginian system relied largely on making life as comfortable as possible for the people of the capital. Few Carthaginian politicians ever risked the unpopular move of conscripting its citizens into the army, and so they amassed their forces out of units brought from all the four corners of the empire. Each army of Carthage was its own unique patchwork and would have spoken dozens of different languages. As the Greek historian Polybius writes, it was therefore impossible to assemble them and address them as a body or to do so by any other means, for how could any general be expected to know all their languages? Again, to address them through several interpreters repeating the same thing four or five times was, if anything, more impractical. It was a system that had many weaknesses, but it allowed the empire to raise large armies at short notice, and it meant that since they could never be accused of sending good Carthaginian men to die, the politicians of the city were largely insulated from the consequences of going to war. But soon, these armies would find themselves embroiled in a bitter struggle that would test this system to its breaking point and threaten to bring the whole empire to the brink of destruction. These wars would erupt over what would soon become the most fought over piece of land in the Mediterranean, that is, the island of Sicily. Sicily is the largest island in the Mediterranean Sea. It sits off the southern end of Italy, separated by the narrow waters of the Straits of Messina, only three kilometers wide at its narrowest point. Sicily's most prominent landmark is the volcano Mount Etna, towering at 3,000 meters over its eastern coast. Due to the island's particularly violent geology, this is one of the most active volcanoes in the world. Although we think of it today as part of Europe, Sicily is actually on the northern edge of the African continental plate, right at the impact point where the European plate is grinding it downwards into the earth's mantle. The collision of these titanic forces means that Mount Etna erupts an average 200 times every year. The volcanic ash spewed by this volcano gives the soil of Sicily an incredible fertility, meaning that its farmlands have always been rich. At first, Carthage enjoyed an unrivaled position on the island, trading with the Sicilian locals in the west, just a short hop away from their capital in Africa. But soon, they would come into conflict with another group of people that for much of this history would be their greatest rivals on the sea and the land, a people who were at the same time also busy establishing colonies across the Mediterranean. These were the Greeks. The Greeks, like the Phoenicians, were expert sailors and had built a number of thriving colonies in southern Italy, in what is now Turkey and in the Black Sea. Beginning in the 8th century BC, Greek explorers and traders began expanding their interests onto the island of Sicily. Like the Phoenicians, the Greeks at this time weren't a unified people. They spoke four different dialects of Greek and countless sub-dialects, and came from dozens of independent city states and island kingdoms that often fought with each other more bitterly than with any foreigners. But despite these internal divisions, the Greeks would expand
across the southern portion of Italy and Sicily, and joined up this series of colonies into an area that they would call Megale Helas, or Greater Greece. Wherever they went, Greek settlers were in part inspired by the myth of their hero, Heracles, who the Romans would call Hercules. He was a half-divine warrior who traveled the length and breadth of Europe, performing his famous twelve labors, and meanwhile performing great deeds wherever he passed through. Wherever a new Greek colony sprung up around the Mediterranean, a new installment of the Hercules myth would quickly be added to show that this had also been one of his stops. In some places, he was celebrated for slaying giants and mythical beasts, while in others his feats were more mundane. In the Greek colonies of southern Italy, he was remembered for banishing a plague of flies that was harming the livestock. In Crete, he had rid the island of wild beasts, and in Sicily, he had caught an errant bull and bested the king in a wrestling match. In Spain, Diodorus of Sicily recounts that depending on who you asked, Hercules was credited with either creating the Straits of Gibraltar by tearing the land apart, or with narrowing it to keep out sea monsters. Whereas before that time, a great space had stood between Africa and Europe, he now narrowed the passage in order that by making it shallow and narrow, he might prevent the great sea monsters from passing out of the ocean and into the inner sea. Some authorities, however, say just the opposite, namely that the two continents were originally joined, and that he cut a passage between them, that the ocean was mingled with the sea. On this question, however, it will be possible for every man to think as he may please. In one of the most dramatic episodes of these tales, during his tenth labor, Hercules is tasked with stealing the red cattle of the ogre Geryon, who lived in Arithia in southern Spain, close to the Phoenician colony of Gardiz. Since Geryon lived so far in the west, it was said, the hides of his cattle had been stained red by their close proximity to the setting sun.